                       US Quadball Casebook
Welcome to the Rules Casebook for the 2024-25 US Quadball season. Below you’ll find examples of
plays that have been called one way or inconsistently throughout the season, and have been given an
official ruling from the US Quadball Officials and Rules Teams to be used during the 2024-2025 US
Quadball season. This is a living document! Officials team will be adding more examples to this document
as the season progresses, and each month the most recent updates will be covered at the Officials Town
Hall.

Beneath each rule there is a corresponding video and explanation of the ruling. If you have any questions,
or would like clarity on calls you’ve seen on film this season, please send the question, film(with
timestamp), and excerpt from the rulebook(if applicable) to officials@usquadball.com. We might use your
video as an example in the future!




1.Protected Keeper not advancing out of zone

Rule: 7.4.1.B.i- A protected Keeper must directly and immediately advance the quadball out of the keeper
zone, attempt to complete a pass, or drop the quadball to the ground.

Clarification: More focus on “directly and immediately”, adjudication of a blue card for Delay of Game. The
impetus for the protected Keeper to move forward towards the Keeper Zone line and not be called for
delay of game is on the protected keeper, not the head referee's warning. Once the protected Keeper
regains possession of the quadball, they must advance the quadball towards the keeper zone line. If they
stop at any point, the head referee will say “Advance”(which acts as a warning for delay of game), and
then begin to count down from 1. On the cadence of zero, if the player has stayed still, taken “baby
steps”, walked at an angle, or refused to pass the ball, the head referee should stop play and award a
blue card penalty to the protected Keeper for delay of game. This can extend to other behaviors if the
head referee believes the offense is trying to delay the game. The protected Keeper can stop the
countdown by taking a full step towards the Keeper Zone Line or releasing/passing the quadball. If a
quadball is passed to a chaser in the keeper zone, rules of defensive pressure in Rule 7.4.1.C.ii apply, not
this clarification for a protected Keeper in the Keeper Zone.

Examples 1 and 2:
https://youtu.be/dSkpiL-s8Dw?si=ntqHt_htghxfnUAM

At 3:31 Orange Keeper begins with the quadball, protected in their zone. Rather than advance, they walk
almost directly sideways, and then diagonal, before finally leaving the keeper zone. This is a blue card for
Delay of game as soon as the Keeper starts walking to the left, and a turnover to Rutgers nearest eligible
player.

At 4:32 Orange Keeper begins with the quadball, protected in their zone. Rather than advance, they stop
moving completely for a couple of seconds, before walking to the left, stopping again, and continuing this
until leaving the keeper zone. This is a blue card for Delay of Game as soon as the Keeper stops for more
than one second.

Example 3:
https://www.youtube.com/live/LutpwkLlm7o?si=oNClop8NpzO__pSH

At 5:45, Black Keeper starts advancing the quadball out of the keeper zone, stops briefly, then continues
to advance the quadball out of the Keeper Zone. This is legal, as the Keeper did not stop



2.Third Dodgeball Immunity Limitations

Rules 5.5.3-While a beater is claiming immunity, they are subject to the following restrictions:
A. The beater must directly and immediately proceed to gain possession of the third
dodgeball.
i. The beater may approach the ball from any direction they prefer.
ii. Taking any other action while immune is an immunity violation.
iii.The beater loses their immunity once they gain possession of the dodgeball.
a. The beater remains immune while attempting to pick up the third dodgeball, even if their fist is lowered
in doing so.


Example:
https://youtu.be/t6h8iB9tphU?si=qPvojPbWtunq3xhZ

Clip 1
Beater claims third dodgeball immunity and runs to the third dodgeball. They stand over the dodgeball for
over a second before picking it up to gain possession. Players are eligible to stand over the third
dodgeball or reorient themselves around the dodgeball for no more than one second or a “one
mississippi” count. This is a Blue Card for an immunity violation for not “directly and immediately
proceeding to gain possession of the third dodgeball.”

Clip 2
Purple Beater begins the motion of beating Red Beater BEFORE Red Beater regained possession of the
third dodgeball. Per 5.5.2.D, If an opponent begins the final singular natural motion on an attempted
knockout before the beater loses their immunity, the formerly immune beater cannot be knocked out by
that attempt. Red Beater is called clear and play continues. No penalty.

Clip 3:
Completely legal play. Red Beater claims third dodgeball immunity, directly and immediately proceeds to
gain possession and does so. Purple Beater waits until Red Beater clearly has possession before making
their beat.

Clip 4:
Completely legal play. Red Beater proceeds to claim possession, and takes a legal route(by approaching
the ball from the direction they preferred). Green Beater waits until Red Beater gains possession(by
kicking the third dodgeball) before attempting a beat, which is completely legal.
Clip 5:
Red Beater claims third dodgeball immunity and attempts to regain possession, but Green Beater is
physically standing over the third dodgeball preventing Red Beater from gaining possession. This is a
double dodgeball turnover and a back to hoops for Green Beater for Third Dodgeball Interference. See
5.5.1.B.b.

Clip 6:
Completely legal play. Red Beater proceeds to claim possession, and takes a legal route(by approaching
the ball from the direction they preferred). Green Beater waits until Red Beater gains possession(by
kicking the third dodgeball) before attempting a beat, which is completely legal.



3. Players making referee calls

Rule 10.3.2. Players and team staff may not use verbal or visual referee signals or commands. This is a
blue card penalty.

Clarification:
The one exception is players are allowed to mimic the referee signal for a good goal(two arms above the
head), as it is a universal signal and rules and officials teams decided that players signaling it has little to
no impact on the game. Two points of focus for this rule are players calling opponents “beat” or “clear”
and players making “ball out” calls instead of the officials. These are blue card penalties.

4. Delay of game(Stalling)

Rule 7.4.1.D-E:

i. On each drive, the Chasers on the offensive team must act with the overall primary intent to score.
Players in possession of the quadball may not act with the overall primary intent to waste time for any
reason.

E. The head referee may issue a warning when the referee determines that the team is beginning to delay
the game.

i. Teams must respond immediately to this warning to avoid a penalty for delay of game. Multiple warnings
may be given for delay of game during a single game, as the referee determines to be appropriate.

Clarification: More emphasis on warning and, if necessary, carding for delay of game. More emphasis on
officiating with the “teams must respond immediately to this warning to avoid penalty of game”. Once a
head referee thinks a team is stalling, they will give a verbal “Warning for Delay of Game”. Upon saying
that, the Head Referee will count(out loud) down from 3 and not stop until the offense has made a play
that proves their overall primary intent is to score. Those plays are when the offense begins physically
engaging the defense. This can be a pass to somewhere deeper into the defense, a drive, or even an
attempt to score. You are allowed to drive and pass but the drive has to actually engage the defense.
Once a team makes a play that stops a delay of game countdown from a referee, they are no longer in
danger of being carded for delay of game. Were they to stall again later in the game, or even in the same
possession, they should be given another warning, and thus another countdown. This should be
continuous practice throughout the game and consistently enforced and constantly communicated to
players.

When adjudicating Delay of Game, please refer to the referee resource One Pager, found at
members.usquadball.org/ref

Example 1:
https://youtu.be/aDVO6S4YFXE?si=chaTmKEX3yGkyUzK

At 10:35, Black team has the quadball and starts to pass around the Blue Team Defense. The first pass at
10:37 is a textbook example of engaging the defense to prevent delay of game. The Black Keeper
receives the quadball and then stays on the outside of the play, barely moving, for roughly 10 seconds.
Their primary intent was not to score, and at some point during that 10 seconds, the head referee should
yell “Warning for Delay of Game” and start counting down from 3. Black team would then have had to
engage the defense again to stop the countdown, with a play much like #4’s initial pass. Had Black
continued to stall until the head referee finished their countdown(paired whistle blasts a second after
saying the “1” in the 3-second countdown), Black keeper would have been given a blue card for delay of
game, switched headbands, and the quadball would be turned over to Blue’s nearest eligible chaser.
You’ll see at 11:15, the head referee warns for delay of game, and then Black engages the defense with a
pass, abating the warning.

5. Reckless Play

Rule 6.3.2.b.E.i- It is the tackling player's responsibility to attempt to ensure the safety of the player being
tackled. Reckless and dangerous tackles are illegal.

Clarification: More emphasis on giving yellow cards for tackles made where the tackler did not attempt to
ensure the safety of the player being tackled. “Ensuring safety” is the difference in guiding a player to the
ground instead of throwing them to the ground. Reckless tackles apply to hits made with increased
momentum resulting in a loss of control while tackling.

Examples 1 and 2
https://youtu.be/zkFjT18jI6k?feature=shared

At 46:51, Red Chaser tackles Black Chaser by running at them, grabbing them with two arms, and using
their momentum to twist and throw Black Chaser to the ground(by their neck). This is a yellow card
penalty for either the illegal neck contact OR for reckless play.

At 6:25, Red Chaser tackles Black Chaser by engaging with two arms and guiding Red Chaser all the
way to the ground. This is a hard, but very legal, hit.

Example 3:
https://youtu.be/Wht8f4x7Mjg?si=IF4XIYmmr02_Z-BN

At 4:34, Blue Chaser tackles Orange Chaser by running at them, grabbing them with two arms, and using
their momentum to twist and throw Orange chaser to the ground. This is a yellow card penalty for reckless
play.
Example 4:
https://www.youtube.com/live/LutpwkLlm7o?si=fu0JT3pqjTBv2q7g

At 18:52, White Keeper attempts a tackle on Black Keeper. They attempt to make contact with two
arms(albeit from behind) and proceed to leave the ground and lose control of the tackle attempt. Yellow
card for illegal contact to the back OR yellow card penalty for reckless play.

6. Charging a Stationary Player

Rule 6.3.4.E.- It is illegal to charge a stationary opponent.
i. If the stationary player has not been stationary long enough for the charging player to adjust
their movement, that charging player will not be penalized.

Note: To accelerate getting the casebook edited, the examples used below are pre-existing clipped plays
on Instagram. As the season goes on these links will be replaced by videos housed on Youtube. Thank
you to posttheclips4quadball!

Clarification: A player with a ball is no longer allowed to charge a stationary player. This is to
prevent dangerous and unnecessary contact, specifically when offensive players are driving to
the hoops. This also gives an option for players to “opt-out of” or “opt-in to” contact.

Explanation: Opting out of contact means players establishing themselves as a stationary player which is
defined as a player whose feet are set and who has no horizontal momentum. By players establishing
themselves as a stationary player, a player on the opposing team cannot legally charge them. The main
thing a player can do to establish themselves as a stationary player is set their feet and stop moving like
in Example 1 in the folder below. They can also brace for contact by holding their arms down, as if setting
a common basketball screen (Examples 2 and 3). This is the recommended and safest way players
should establish themselves as stationary players.

    -​   If the stationary player still wants to contest the player with a ball, they can lift their arms to block
         a shot or dunk, as shown in Example 4 in the folder below. This is still considered “opting-out” of
         contact.

A player “opts-in” to contact by doing things that make them ineligible to be considered stationary players.
These actions can include jumping to contest a dunk,setting feet without giving time for the opposing
player to respond, attempting a tackle, or moving their feet and not keeping them set. Players on the other
side of this play should be mindful when generating enough momentum to cause forceful contact, and
paying attention to players signaling their stationary status.


Example 1: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C9s6JMpuaTJ/?igsh=MW9sYWxzNDl5MjB2NA==
Red Keeper drives to the middle hoop and dunks the ball. In the process of dunking, Red Keeper creates
forceful contact against White Chaser with their body. White Chaser loses their stationary status as soon
as they move towards Red Keeper to contest the dunk, making this a legal, no-call play.
Example 2: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C6kAhiiOXIw/?igsh=dmF1d295NXBsNHA0
Black Keeper drives through two Blue defenders and dunks the ball. In the first hit, Blue Chaser loses
their stationary status when they move their feet to engage with Black Keeper. That makes the contact by
Black Keeper legal in that sense.
    -​   Note, this could still be an illegal charge from Black Keeper because of the possibility they led the
         charge with a single point of contact, it is unclear from the video.


In the second hit, Blue Keeper takes steps to engage Black Keeper, making Blue Keeper lose their
stationary status. Black Keeper decides to go around them and dunk the ball instead of going through
them, even though charging Blue Keeper would have been legal in this instance.

Example 3: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C5ik_NvOvwl/?igsh=NG5neTVienU0ZTVm
Blue Chaser drives through Orange Defense and dunks on the middle hoop over Orange Chaser. Orange
Chasers signals that they are opting into contact by not setting both their feet and contesting the shot.
This makes the forceful contact generated by Blue Chase legal.

Example 4:https://www.instagram.com/reel/C4syNkwO4tv/?igsh=MXFsMzFhNHgxd3hheg==
Black Chaser shrugs off a tackle from White Keeper, then charges through White Chaser before scoring.
White Chaser does not have set feet and thus is not stationary. Black Chasers charge is legal play.

Example 5: https://www.instagram.com/reel/C4b8w1bs_Te/?igsh=MTg1ajU1eHR5MnB0bQ==
Black Chaser dunks on the middle hoop over White Chaser. While contesting the dunk, White Chaser
jumps in air, losing their stationary status and making the forceful contact generated from Black Chaser
legal.


Example 6:
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1-AC8ZaKEMC04c6dh1t69kS4jx6wLIybH
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1HSjBrNs1zRyEWjE-X2e3gGDA7ZpvlTez/view?usp=sharing


Several examples of illegally charging a stationary player. Every example here is a yellow card
penalty. ​
​
We understand there are still questions as to what an illegal version of this call looks like
in game and are continuing to look for game footage of this penalty taking place. So far,
instances have been out of camera focus or in games that do not have livestream/film. As
the season continues, we will continue to add examples to the casebook to clarify legal
and illegal charges to help maintain consistency.


7. False Start

Rule 3.2.1. A player that does either of the following after the head referee calls “Ready” but before the
referee calls
“Brooms up” has committed a false start and should send themselves back to hoops.
i. The player already has their broom off the ground at brooms up call.
ii. The player moves early and touches the other side of their starting line before brooms up.
J. A player that commits a false start and continues to pursue active play shall be given a blue card.

Clarification: False Starts will be back to hoops offenses unless said players continue to pursue active
play.

Example 1:
https://www.youtube.com/live/s07N6iqOj5g?si=NuP_EalQSfxyLvlX

At 4:50:28, Grey Beater false starts. This would now be a back to hoops instead of a stoppage of play and
blue card.

8. Propelling a ball off-pitch

Rule 7.5.2.G- It is illegal to propel a ball with the intent of sending any ball out-of-bounds.

Clarification: Head Referees should evaluate whether a propelled ball off-pitch was actually intentional, or
the harmless result of a play gone awry(missed beat, missed pass, missed shot). In cases where there is
reasonable doubt that the ball was propelled with the intent of sending it out of bounds, the normal
inbounding procedure should be followed. Components to take into account are: distance from sidelines,
temperature conditions that may affect the trajectory of the ball, and amount of control the propeller had
(such as a bad kick or swat).
    -​ This rule does not supercede the penalty for illegal swat for seekers. If the first touch after a
         seeker swat is out of bounds, they still receive a blue card.
