                                                    1

                             US Quadball Rulebook
Version 1.0
Contents
Basics of the Game 4
1. Team Composition and Substitutions 7
    1.1. Leadership and Team Staff
    1.2. Rosters and Players
    1.3. Substitutions
    1.4. Substitution Area and the Team Bench
2. Equipment and Dimensions 12
    2.1. Field Lines and Markings
    2.2. Hoops
    2.3. Game Balls
    2.4. Brooms
    2.5. Player Equipment
3. Game Procedures 23
    3.1. Preliminaries
    3.2. Starting the Game
    3.3. Stoppages
    3.4. Regulating Game Time
    3.5. Forfeits
    3.6. Suspended Games
4. Scoring 32
    4.1. Goal Scoring
    4.2. Restarting After a Goal
    4.3. Broken or Fallen Hoops
    4.4. The Flag Catch
    4.5 Closely Timed Plays
5. Dodgeballs and the Knockout Effect 37
    5.1. The Broom
    5.2. Knocking Out Players
                                                     2
    5.3. Knockout Procedure
    5.4. Redirecting and Catching Live Dodgeballs
    5.5. The Third Dodgeball and Knockout Immunity
    5.6. Natural Motion
6. Physical Contact and Interactions 46
    6.1. Definitions
    6.2. Standard Contact Penalties
    6.3 Contact Legalities
    6.3. Seekers and the Flag Runner
    6.4. Right of Way
    6.5. Unsporting Behavior
7. Boundaries and Balls 56
    7.1. Using the Balls
    7.2. Keeper Zone
    7.3. Offense, Defense, and Drives
    7.4. Pace of Play
    7.5. Boundaries
8. The Flag Runner 65
    8.1. Role of the Flag Runner
    8.2. The Flag Runner’s Timing
    8.3. Flag Runner Requirements
    8.4. Ruled as Down
9. Penalties 68
    9.1. Disciplinary Actions
    9.2. General Foul Procedures
    9.3. Timing of Fouls
    9.4. The Penalty Box
    9.5. Advantage
    9.6. Delayed Penalties
10. Game Officials 78
    10.1. The Officials
    10.2. Officials’ Calls
    10.3. Players and Officials
                                       3
Appendix A: Definitions 82
Appendix B: List of Fouls by Type 84
    B-1. Individual Fouls
    B-2. Speaking Captain Fouls
    B-3. Forfeit Fouls
Appendix C: Changelog 90
Credits 92
                                                                                                             4

Basics of the Game
QUADBALL™: AN OVERVIEW
Quadball is a mixed gender contact sport with a unique mix of elements from rugby, dodgeball,
wrestling, flag football, and other sports. A Quadball team is made up of at least seven athletes who play
with brooms between their legs when in play. While the game can appear chaotic to the casual observer,
once familiar with the basic rules, Quadball is an exciting sport to watch and even more exciting to play.

POSITIONS OVERVIEW
Each team has four chasers and two beaters in play at all times. One chaser is designated as the keeper.
Each team sends one seeker into the game at the end of the seeker floor (See: 3.4.3. Seeker Floor).

Keeper and Chaser Overview

Chasers in play per team: Four, one of which is designated as the keeper.
Game ball used: Quadball
Headband color: Green (keeper) & white (chaser)
Objective: Throw, kick, or in any way propel the Quadball through the opposing team’s hoops to score
ten points and prevent opponents from propelling the Quadball through their own hoops.

Beater Overview
Beaters in play per team: Two
Game ball used: Dodgeball
Headband color: Black
Objective: Throw, kick, or in any way propel the dodgeballs to disrupt the flow of the game by
“knocking out” other players.

Seeker Overview
Seekers in play per team: One
Game ball used: Flag
Headband color: Yellow
Objective: Remove the flag from the flag runner to score 35 points and prevent the opposing seeker from
removing the flag from the flag runner.

GAMEPLAY OVERVIEW
Chasers
                                                                                                               5

   A. The chasers and keepers use the Quadball to score goals. Goals are worth ten points each.
   B. Chasers advance the ball down the field by running with it, passing it to teammates, or kicking it.
   C. Chasers defend against potential goals by the opposing team through positioning themselves or
      through initiating legal physical contact with other chasers.
   D. While in their team’s own keeper zone, the keeper is immune to the knockout effect and has
      several other unique powers (See: 7.2.2. Keeper-specific powers). During this time, the keeper is
      considered to be a protected keeper. Otherwise, the keeper position is the same as the chaser
      position.

Beaters
   A. The beaters use dodgeballs to disrupt the flow of the game by “knocking out” any player from the
      opposing team who does not have knockout immunity (See: 5.5.2. Claiming Knockout Immunity).
   B. Any player hit by a dodgeball propelled by an opponent is out until they complete the knockout
      procedure, unless they have knockout immunity (See: 5.3.1. Knockout Procedure).

Seekers
   A. The seekers try to remove the flag from the flag runner to score 35 points.
   B. The flag is a ball attached to the waistband of the flag runner, a neutral official dressed in yellow,
      whose job is to remain fair to both teams while avoiding capture for as long as possible.

FOULS OVERVIEW
From the time that players enter the player area for a game until after the game has ended, players are
forbidden from taking certain actions called fouls. Players who commit a foul face different
consequences depending on the severity of the offense.

Back to Hoops
A back to hoops foul indicates that a player must cease active play and complete the knockout
procedure (See: 5.3.1. Knockout Procedure).

Blue Card
A blue card indicates that a player must spend one minute of game time in the penalty box and the
player’s team must play a player down for this minute. If the opposing team scores a goal before the
minute expires, the player may be released early and re-enter play. Blue cards do not stack to become
higher penalties.

Yellow Card
A yellow card indicates that a player must spend one minute of game time in the penalty box and the
                                                                                                             6
player’s team must play a player down for this minute. If the opposing team scores a goal before the
minute expires, the player may be released from the penalty box early and re-enter play. A player who
receives three yellow cards in a single game must be issued a red card instead of their third yellow card.

Red Card
A red card indicates that a player is barred from the rest of the game and the player’s team must play a
player down for two full minutes of game time.

Ejection
A referee may eject a player for egregious violations of the rules.
                                                                                                               7


1. Team Composition and Substitutions
1.1. LEADERSHIP AND TEAM STAFF
1.1.1. Mandatory Speaking Captain

Each team must designate one individual on their official roster to serve as the speaking captain for a
game.
   A. The speaking captain has the sole power to communicate team decisions and team questions to the
         officials
         i. Players may speak to officials on their own behalf.
         ii. Officials may direct any person to stop speaking with any official.
   B. If the team’s speaking captain is unable to continue the duties of the position for any reason,
        their team must select a new speaking captain.
         i. If the team’s original speaking captain for the game legally returns to the bench or pitch,
             they shall resume the role of speaking captain.
   C. Speaking captains may only enter the pitch while play is stopped, unless they are entering as an
        active player.
         i. If the speaking captain substantially illegally enters the pitch or affects play while illegally
             on the pitch, they are encroaching on the pitch.
   D. The speaking captain may request to have a player from their own team ejected from the game.
       The head referee may wait for a lull in play to initiate this ejection.

⚑ Blue Card—Encroaching on the pitch

⚑ Ejection—Ejection of a player due to request by their own speaking captain

1.1.2. Team Staff
Non-playing members of the team, including non-playing coaches, are team staff.

    A. Tournament directors may limit the number of team staff allowed in the player area.
         i. This number must be greater than or equal to three..
    B. The names of team staff must be communicated to the tournament director prior to the event if
        they are not on the roster as a coach.
    C. Team staff are not eligible to enter play.
         i. All other rules that apply to substitutes also apply to team staff.
                                                                                                              8

1.2. ROSTERS AND PLAYERS

1.2.1. Rosters

   A. Each team is made up of between seven and twenty-one players.
        i. A team must be able to field a legal set of required players to begin or continue a game.
             a. A team must be able to field at least seven eligible players at all times.
             b. If a player’s injury would cause their team to forfeit, and the onsite medical staff
                 believes the player can safely return to the field with approximately a minute or less of
                 treatment, the game shall remain stopped until the player returns, rather than declaring a
                 forfeit.
   B. Team rosters must abide by all USQ regulations regarding rosters.

⚑ Forfeit—Falling below seven eligible players

1.2.2. Positions

   A. A team shall have four chasers in play, one of which is the keeper.
        i. Keepers must wear a green headband on their forehead.
        ii. The remaining chasers must wear a white headband on their forehead.
        iii. Chasers may use the Quadball in any legal manner.
        iv. Keepers and chasers shall be considered separate positions for the purposes of
             substitution and position changes.
   B. A team shall have two beaters in play.
        i. Beaters must wear a black headband on their forehead.
        ii. Beaters may use the dodgeballs in any legal manner.
   C. A team shall have one seeker in play while the flag is in play.
        i. Seekers must wear a yellow headband on their forehead.
   D. Any players not in play are substitutes.
        i. Substitutes are not designated as being of any position.
        ii. Substitutes are not required to wear a headband.
   E. Players in the penalty box are considered in play and count toward the position
       requirements for their teams.
   F. No penalty shall be given if teams are lacking a full complement of players due to an active
       substitution or because a seeker neglects to enter the field at the end of the seeker floor.

⚑ Speaking Captain Yellow Card—Illegal set of players in play

⚑ Speaking Captain Yellow Card—Intentionally failing to send a seeker into the game
                                                                                                                 9

1.2.3. Legal Set of Players
    A. Teams must adhere to the current gameplay policy on fielding a legal set of players. An illegal
       set of players that impacts play will result in a yellow card to the speaking captain.
       i. An illegal set of players that does not significantly impact play will be treated as no harm, no
       foul.
       ii. When the card is given, the set of players on the field must be made legal with as few substitutions as
       possible before play is restarted.

⚑ Speaking Captain Yellow Card—Illegal set of players in play

1.3. SUBSTITUTIONS

1.3.1. Substitution Restrictions

    A. Standard substitutions must be made while play is live, with the below exceptions.
         i. During a timeout.
         ii. During Intermission
         iii. Replacing an injured player (See: 1.3.4. Substitutions Due to Injury).
         iv. A keeper changing positions with another player in play when sent to the penalty box (See:
              9.4.2. Proceeding to the Penalty Box).
         v. Replacing an ejected player
         vi. Replacing a player in play with a fouling substitute (See: 9.4.5. Penalties to Substitutes and
              Team Staff).
         vii. Correcting an illegal set of players after a penalty has been given.

1.3.2. Live Play Substitution Procedure

To replace a player with a substitute while play is live, the following conditions must be met:

    A. The exiting player is not knocked out.
    B. The exiting player leaves the pitch within the team’s substitution area and then promptly
        dismounts.
         i. The player must not dismount before crossing the boundary line.
         ii. The exiting player is no longer eligible to be knocked out once they have dismounted.
    C. Any equipment (including position headbands), must be traded while out of bounds.
    D. The entering player must mount the broom in the substitution area and step onto the pitch before
       interacting with play.
         i. The entering player enters the pitch along the boundary of the team’s substitution area.
    E. A substitution is complete when the entering player crosses the boundary of the team’s
       substitution area into the pitch and is only touching the ground inside the pitch.
                                                                                                             10
        i. The entering player is then immediately eligible to engage in gameplay.
   F. A player that enters play through a substitution that violates this procedure has committed a
      substitution violation.
        i. A player that repeatedly commits substitution violations may be penalized for an illegal
            substitution.
   G. A player that enters play through a substitution that violates this procedure and interacts with
      play has committed an illegal substitution.
        i. The entering player receives the card for violations of this procedure.

⚑ Repeat Procedure—Substitution violation

⚑ Blue Card—Illegal substitution

1.3.3. Stopped Play Substitution Procedure
   A. The entering player replaces the exiting player at the spot of the exiting player when play was
      stopped.
        i. The substitute retains possession of any ball held by the exiting player.
        ii. If the exiting player was knocked out, the entering player is off broom when play is
             restarted.

1.3.4. Substitutions due to Injury
   A. An injured player is expected to follow all of the substitution procedures as outlined in 1.3.2.
      Live Play Substitution Procedure unless play is stopped.
          a. If an injured player is openly bleeding or too injured to follow the substitution
               procedure, play must be stopped.
          b. If the player has sustained a serious injury, is endangered by approaching gameplay, or
               has sustained a non-superficial head injury, play must be stopped immediately.
          c. If the previous conditions are not met, the head referee should allow play to continue
               until stopping play would not significantly advantage either team.
          d. If play is stopped due to an injured player:
          e. The player must leave the pitch and be replaced by a substitute.
                  i.    If a player is forced, by rule, to leave the pitch for an injury that requires no
                        treatment and there is no eligible substitute, that player may take their broom
                        and resume play at the boundary of their substitution area.
          f. If there is no penalty on the play related to the injury, the opposing team may also make
               a substitution of the same position.
   B. The head referee may require that a player receive medical attention before allowing them to
      return if the player is bleeding, is suspected of a concussion, or their injury is otherwise severe.
          a. This player is ineligible to return to play until they receive permission from an official,
               who must be satisfied that any bleeding has stopped or a medical professional has
               cleared them.
                                                                                                            11
  C. A player may not feign an injury for any reason.

⚑ Yellow Card—Feigning an injury

1.4. SUBSTITUTION AREA AND THE TEAM BENCH

1.4.1. Substitution Area Restrictions
   A. All substitutions must occur in the substitution area.
   B. Whenever play is live, substitutes, coaches, and team staff should never enter the pitch.
   C. Teams should use the substitution area for players about to substitute into the game and the team
      bench for all others.
        i. If a team is repeatedly crowding the pitch boundary line, the officials may require all
            substitutes on that team to remain in the team bench unless about to substitute into the
            game.
   D. Any extra equipment or property not necessary for play must be kept out of the substitution area.
        i. Any extra balls kept in the team bench must be stored in a bag or other storage
            container.
   E. One substitute or team staffer at a time may leave the substitution area or team bench to check
       information with the scorekeeper or timekeeper, but must neither interfere with the scorekeeper or
       timekeeper’s duties, nor enter the pitch.
                                                                                                             12

2. Equipment and Dimensions




2.1. FIELD LINES AND MARKINGS
2.1.1. Boundary lines

The pitch consists of four boundary lines which form a 36 by 66 yard rectangle.

    A. The 36 yard boundary lines are the endlines.
    B. The 66 yard boundary lines are the sidelines.
         i. The sideline closest to the scorekeeper’s table is the “scorekeeper’s sideline.”
    C. Tournaments may apply to the Gameplay Department for a waiver to use a shorter field. That
       pitch must still consist of 36 yard endlines and 66 yard sidelines, but is not required to have the
       full 48 yard by 72 yard player area.

2.1.2. The Midfield Line

The midfield line connects the midpoints of the sidelines.
                                                                                                                13



2.1.3. Keeper Zone Lines

There are two keeper zone lines, which run parallel to the endlines, connect the sidelines, and are
positioned 12 yards away from the midfield line on either side of it.

2.1.4. Goal Lines

There are two goal lines, which run parallel to the endlines, connect the sidelines, and are
positioned 18 yards away from the midfield line on either side of it.

2.1.5. Penalty Boxes

Each team has a penalty box outside of the pitch.

    A. Each box is a 6 by 6 yard square area that begins at the midfield line and extends along the
        scorekeeper’s sideline in the direction of the team’s bench.

2.1.6. Ball Positions

    A. There are four starting ball positions on the midline. One dodgeball is placed 6 yards in either direction
    from the midpoint of the midline. A third dodgeball and the quadball will be placed a further 3 yards from
    the midpoint (9 yards total). The results of the pre-game coin-flip determine which side the quadball is
    located on.
                                                                                                         14




2.1.7. Substitution Areas
Each team’s substitution area is a 21 by 3 yard rectangle outside of the pitch and bordering their own
keeper zone.

    A. One side of the substitution area is the scorekeeper’s sideline inside the keeper zone.
    B. The substitution area extends 3 yards away from the sideline.

2.1.8. Team Benches

Each team’s bench is a 21 by 3 yard rectangle that extends 3 yards farther from the pitch behind their
substitution area.

2.1.9. The Player Area

The player area is a rectangle enclosing the pitch with the pitch at its center.

    A. This rectangle is:
        i. 48 yards wide and 72 yards long.
    B. The player area must be clear of obstacles and dangerous terrain.
        i. No non-tournament specific obstructions, such as spectators, may be set up within the
                                                                                                        15
              player area.
    C. During gameplay, the player area is reserved for:
         i. Players on the active roster of the teams in play.
         ii. Referees and officials assigned to the game currently in play.
         iii. Tournament staff given access to the player area (at their own risk) at the discretion
              of the head referee or tournament director.
         iv. Team staff (as designated in 1.1.2. Team Staff).
    D. Spectators may not enter the player area.
    E. Tournaments may apply to the Gameplay Department for a waiver to use a field with a player
        area 48 yards wide and 54 yards long.

2.1.10. Field Markings

Various parts of the pitch and surrounding area should be marked in a clear manner. These markings
are usually made with cones or lines.

    A. The following must be marked in some way:
        i. The pitch boundary (as described in 2.1.1.)
        ii. The midfield line (as described in 2.1.2.)
        iii. The keeper zone lines (as described in 2.1.3.)
    B. The following markings are optional, though recommended:
        i. The goal lines (as described in 2.1.4.)
        ii. The penalty boxes (as described in 2.1.5.)
         iii. The ball positions (as described in 2.1.6.)
        iv. The team benches (as described in 2.1.8.)
        v. The player area (as described in 2.1.9.)
        vi. The hoop positioning (as described in 2.2.3.)
              a. These markings must not interfere with the stability of the hoops.

2.2. HOOPS

2.2.1. Hoop Composition and Construction

    A. Each hoop must be made of a post and a circular loop attached to the top. These may be made of
        any material other than metal or concrete and must not be dangerous to players.
    B. A hoop must be attached to a base to keep it upright.
         i. This base should be included in the hoop pole height.
         ii. Other than metal fasteners, the base must not be made of hard metal or concrete.
    C. Hoops must be freestanding and able to withstand play.
         i. Referees must disallow any hoops or bases that they believe are dangerous to the players.

2.2.2. Hoop Shape
                                                                                                                16

    A. Each set of hoops must have posts of three different heights.
        i. These heights must be 3 feet, 4.5 feet, and 6 feet.
    B. A hoop loop must be fastened to the top of each post.
        i. The inner diameter of each hoop loop must be 33 inches.
        ii. The attachment of the hoop loop must not make the total height of the post exceed the
            required post heights.

2.2.3. Hoop Positioning

    A. Three hoops are positioned on each goal line.
         i. The 6 foot hoop must be placed at the center of the goal line.
         ii. The other two hoops are placed on the goal line, 3 yards away from the 6 foot hoop on
              either side.
         iii. Facing either set of hoops from midfield, the 3 foot hoop must be on the left and the 4.5
              foot hoop must be on the right.
    B. The hoop loops must be in line with the goal line.

2.3. GAME BALLS

2.3.1. The Quadball

The Quadball must be:
   A. A volleyball.
    B. Between 25.6 and 26.4 inches in circumference.
    C. The Quadball must maintain its spherical shape and must be neither inflated all the way nor so
       deflated that the average player could grip a bulk of the leather in one hand.

2.3.2. Dodgeballs

The three dodgeballs must be:
    A. Spherical balls made of flexible rubber or rubber-like covers (such as dodgeballs).
    B. 8.5 inches in diameter, 26.7 inches in circumference.
    C. The dodgeballs must maintain their spherical shape and must be neither inflated all the way nor
       so deflated that the average player could grip a bulk of the rubber in one hand.

2.3.3. The Flag

The flag must be:
   A. A standard tennis ball held within a tail.
         i. The tail must have a visible and unobstructed length of between 10 and 12 inches.
             a. If the tail is attached to the outside of the shorts, up to 2 inches of the attachment may be
                 counted toward this minimum length.
                                                                                                                  17
    B. The flag must be tucked in or attached to the shorts of the flag runner in a manner that is secure
        and allows for the removal of the tail by the seeker.

2.3.4. Defective Balls Mid-Play
If a game ball becomes defective (e.g. deflates) while in play, the head referee must stop play to replace
the ball. The following conditions apply:
     A. The head referee must stop play immediately when any ball becomes defective.
     B. If a ball was in midair when it became defective, the replaced or repaired ball is returned to the
        player who last held possession, except the Quadball after a good goal.
           i. If this player is knocked out or dismounted before play is stopped, then the ball is given to the
                nearest eligible player on the same team to this player’s current location.
                 a. If no such player exists, then the ball shall be left at the player’s teams’ hoops..
     C. No goals or knockouts may happen with a ball an official recognized as defective before the
         knockout or goal occurred.
     D. If a dodgeball becomes defective while hitting a player, the knockout counts and the
          dodgeball is considered dead.
           i. If the dodgeball becomes defective in the final motion of being otherwise successfully caught,
               that catch shall count.
     E. If the flag becomes defective during the flag catch (e.g. the tail breaks in half and the seeker gets
         half of it), the catch counts if the seeker cleanly removed the actual ball.
           i. If the flag becomes defective before the catch, the catch must be called no good.




2.4. BROOMS
2.4.1. Broom Regulations

All players in play must have a broom. The broom:

    A. Must consist of a rigid pole made of plastic.
        i. This pole must be between 39 and 41 inches long.
        ii. The outer diameter of this pole must be between .75 and 1.25 inches.
    B. Must not have splinters or sharp points.
    C. Must not be attached to the body, clothing, or other equipment of the player.

2.4.2. Broken Brooms
If a broom breaks during the course of play, the head referee must immediately stop play and it must be
replaced before its player may make any play
                                                                                                       18

    A. It is illegal to knowingly initiate a new play while using a broken broom.
    B. If a player removes their broom due to the danger of the broken broom, the player may remount
       upon the resumption of play, unless deemed off broom by another rule.

    ⚑ Red Card—Knowingly initiating a new play with a broken broom

2.4.3. Providing Brooms

The tournament director for a game must provide the same type and quantity of brooms to both
teams. Teams may provide their own brooms unless this is disallowed by event policy prior to the
event.

2.4.4. Limited Brooms in the Player Area

    A. Each team may have only one broom in the player area for each player in play.
    C. All additional brooms, including replacements for broken brooms, must be stored outside the
       player area, at the scorekeeper’s table, or securely in the team bench.
         i. These additional brooms must not enter the pitch or substitution area unless replacing a
             broken broom during a stoppage of play.

⚑ Speaking Captain Blue Card—Illegal equiment
                                                                                                          19


2.5. PLAYER EQUIPMENT

2.5.1. Safety

Players must not use any equipment or wear anything that is dangerous to themselves or other players.

2.5.2. Mandatory Equipment

While in play, each player must properly wear the following equipment:

   A. A colored headband at least half an inch wide and worn on the forehead distinguishing the
       player’s position.
   B. A jersey.
        i. Jerseys for players on the same team must be readily identifiable, of the same base color,
             and distinguishable from the opposing team.
        ii. The primary jersey color may not be yellow or gold.
        iii. The jersey design must not primarily consist of vertical black and white stripes.
   C. Some sort of bottom (such as shorts, pants, or a skirt).
        i. The primary color of the outermost layer of the bottoms must not be yellow or gold.
        ii. Some form of undergarment must be worn under the bottoms.
   D. Shoes or cleats.
        i. Spikes or studs must not be sharp.
        ii. Spikes or studs must not be completely made of metal or affixed with metal caps.
   E. A mouthguard which shall:
        i. Include an occlusal (protecting and separating the biting surfaces) portion.
        ii. Include a labial (protecting the teeth and supporting structures) portion.
        iii. Cover the posterior teeth with adequate thickness.

⚑ Blue Card—Entering play without wearing mandatory equipment

⚑ Blue Card—Removing mandatory equipment while in active play

2.5.3. Headband Requirements
Position headbands are subject to the following standards.

   A. The color of the headband must be distinct enough to unambiguously identify the player’s
       position.
   B. The headband must be easily visible from a reasonable distance and be identifiable through
       a player’s hair or other equipment.
   C. Hats or other headgear may not be used as headbands.
        i. The positional headband must be worn over the headgear and the headgear must be a color that
                                                                                                              20
               is clearly distinguishable from the headband.
          ii. Headwear that is both in the shape of a band and is a positional color shall be
               considered a headband.
                a. No other positional headband may be worn over this item.
    D. If a player’s headband is lost mid-play, they may continue to play without it. However they
        must replace the headband whenever any of the following occur:
          i. They are knocked out.
          ii. There is a stoppage in play.
          iii. A goal is scored.
                a. Seekers and beaters do not have to replace their headband when a goal is scored.
    E. If an official deems a player’s headband unacceptable for any reason, the player must
       immediately correct the issue.
          i. If this cannot be completed immediately on the pitch, the accidental equipment
               infringement procedure shall be applied (See: 2.5.6. Accidental Equipment
               Infringement).

⚑ Back to Hoops—Illegally failing to replace a lost headband

2.5.4. Jersey Numbers

Each player must have an integer between 0 and 99 clearly visible on the back of their jersey.

   A. The number may not exceed two digits including preceding zeros.
   B. No two players in the player area for the same team may share the same number (illegal
      equipment).
         i. Leading zeros are ignored when determining a player’s number.
         ii. If a team is penalized for having two players wearing the same number in the player area,
              the speaking captain must designate one of the players to change their number.
               a. The designated player is ineligible to be in play until they have a new number affixed to
                   their back and the new number is reported to the scorekeeper.
   C. If a player’s number becomes damaged beyond recognition while in play:
         i. Play is not stopped.
         ii. The referee informs the player that their jersey number has been damaged.
         iii.The player must fix the number the next time they substitute out of the game, or during the
              next stoppage in play, whichever occurs first.
               a. If there is a stoppage in play and the number cannot be quickly fixed, the player must
                   substitute out during that stoppage.
               b. If the issue can only be addressed by giving the player a new number, that new number
                   must be reported to the scorekeeper.
   D. No player may enter play without a legal and recognizable number on their back (illegal equipment).

⚑ Blue Card—Illegal Equipment
                                                                                                              21

⚑ Speaking Captain Blue Card—Illegal Equipment

2.5.5. Additional Equipment

These items are considered “additional equipment” and may be worn with the listed
limitations.

    A. Padding—All padding must:
          i. Be one inch or less in thickness. If the player is wearing multiple pads, they may not exceed
               this total thickness.
          ii. Pass the “knock test,” i.e. when a referee raps on it with a knuckle, it should not make a
               knocking sound.
          iii. Bend easily when a minimal amount of force is applied to it.
    B. Braces—Athletic braces are allowed but must meet the standards of padding above.
          i. A brace may include a hard element; however, any hard plastic or metal must be covered at
               all times during a game and, once covered, must pass the knock test.
          ii. If any hard plastic or metal becomes exposed, the player must leave the pitch and fix the
               problem (See: 2.5.6. Accidental equipment infringement).
          iii. Referees reserve the right to refuse any brace that they believe presents a danger to anyone
               on the field.
    C. Athletic supporters—Athletic supporters (cups) which protect the groin are allowed.
    D. Glasses and eyewear—Players may wear glasses, goggles, or other eyewear.
          i. No eyewear actually made of glass is allowed unless it is worn underneath goggles so the
               glass is not exposed.
          ii. Goggles made of metal, such as lacrosse “cage” goggles, are not allowed.
    E. Gloves—Gloves are allowed and are subject to the same rules as padding.
    F. Special equipment—Equipment approved through the waiver process.
    G. Any additional equipment must be approved by the head referee before the game. Any equipment
        that the referee determines to be dangerous or unfair to either team must not be permitted.

⚑ Blue Card—Using illegal additional equipment in play

⚑ Red Card—Using equipment in play that was disallowed by a game official

2.5.6. Accidental Equipment Infringement
In the event that a player’s previously legal equipment becomes illegal as a result of play:

    A. Play is not stopped unless the referee determines the infringement presents a danger.
    B. The player at fault must leave the pitch to correct the infringement immediately and may be
       replaced with a substitute.
         i. Players do not need to leave the pitch to replace a broken broom.
                                                                                                               22
    C. Any player required to leave the pitch to correct equipment must not re-enter until the equipment
        has been replaced, repaired, or removed.
         i. Mandatory equipment must be replaced or repaired.
              a. If there is no replacement for a broom or headband available, the head referee must
                  stop play until the equipment is provided.
    D. If the player does not leave the pitch upon being informed of the infringement, or re-enters play
       without correcting the infringement, that player is subject to penalty for disregarding an official’s
       directive.

⚑ Yellow Card—Disregarding an official’s directive

2.5.7. Venue Specific Equipment Restrictions

Tournament directors may ban additional equipment to comply with venue requirements, but
may not allow extra equipment.

⚑ Red Card—Using equipment explicitly barred by the tournament director

2.5.8. Intentionally Altering Equipment
It is illegal to intentionally alter any game equipment, including the game balls and hoops, to gain an
advantage.

⚑ Red Card—Illegally altering game equipment

2.5.9. Forbidden Equipment

These items are forbidden equipment and may never be worn by players while in play:

    A. Audio or visual recording devices.
    B. Grip enhancing substances which might transfer to and affect a ball.

⚑ Red Card—Wearing forbidden equipment

2.5.10. Jewelry

    A. Players are not permitted to wear jewelry while in play.
         i. Piercing retainers which are flush with the skin are allowed.
         ii. Medical alert bracelets designed for contact sports by being soft and flush to the skin are
             allowed
    B. Players wearing forbidden jewelry that does not impact gameplay will be ejected.
    C. Players wearing forbidden jewelry that impacts gameplay or the other team must receive a red
       card.
                                                                                                     23

⚑ Ejection—Wearing forbidden jewelry that does not impact the game.

⚑ Red Card—Wearing forbidden jewelry that impacts play.

2.5.11. Equipment Waivers

Players may seek exceptions to equipment rules. Such equipment is considered special equipment and
must be approved by USQ via USQ’s equipment waiver policy prior to its use in any official game.
                                                                                                               24


3. Game Procedures
3.1. PREGAME

3.1.1. Pregame Meeting

Before any game, the head referee calls together the head referee calls together the Speaking
Captains and other representatives of the two teams for the Pregame Meeting.

   A. The head referee should discuss the following with the team representatives:
             i. The identity of each team’s Speaking Captain
             ii. Any ground rules specific to the field.
             iii. The identity of the flag runner.
             iv. Any players the officials should be aware of regarding fielding a legal set of players.
             v. Any other concerns from the attending parties that are specific to the game.

3.1.2. Coin Toss

Teams will participate in a coin toss to decide starting offense, defense, and field position.

    A. The toss shall be called while the coin is in the air by the team with the lower USQ
        ranking.
         i. If the ranking is inapplicable or unknown, the team that has traveled farthest from its point of
             origin shall call the toss.
    B. The winner of the coin toss will get to choose one of the options below. The team that loses
        the coin toss will make the other decision.
         i. Choose whether to start on offense or defense.
         ii. Choose which set of hoops they are attacking/defending.
                                                                                                               25


3.2. STARTING THE GAME




3.2.1. Brooms Up Procedure
To begin the game:

   A. The starters on each team must begin the game on the pitch.
        i. Each team must start the game with four chasers, including the keeper, and two beaters.
        ii. Players may change position headbands and location until brooms down.
        iii. Any player who receives a penalty card prior to the start of the game (or their substitute in
             the case of a red card) must start the game in the penalty box instead.
   B. Offensive team:
        i. One chaser and one beater will be positioned in the half of their keeper zone farther from the
             score table.
        ii. All other players will be on or behind the half of their goal line further from the score table.
   C. Defensive team:
                                                                                                                  26
           i. Two beaters will be positioned on the half of their opponents keeper zone line closer to the
                score table.
           ii. All other players will be on or behind the half of their goal line closer to the score table.
    D. The head referee confirms that both teams and all other officials are ready.
    E. The head referee shouts “Brooms down!”
    F. Once brooms down has been called:
           i. Players may not change their position, headbands, or location.
           ii. No part of a player’s body may contact the ground on or in front of their starting line.
           iii. Each player must have a broom in hand.
                 a. The broom must remain otherwise flat on the ground until brooms up.
    G. The head referee shouts “Ready!”
    H. The head referee shouts “Brooms up!”
           i. On the first “B” sound of brooms up, all players must immediately mount their brooms.
           ii. If there is a false brooms up call, the head referee resets the players and repeats the full
                brooms up procedure.
           iii. In the event of any foul prior to brooms up, the head referee adjudicates the penalty, resets
                the players, and repeats the full brooms up procedure.
    I. A player that does either of the following after the head referee calls “Ready” but before the referee calls
    “Brooms up” has committed a false start and should send themselves back to hoops.
           i. The player already has their broom off the ground at brooms up call.
           ii. The player moves early and touches the other side of their starting line before brooms up.
    J. If a player commits a false start and completes the knockout procedure before interacting with play, no
    card for false start shall be earned by that player.

⚑ Blue Card—Changing position headbands or location after brooms down.

⚑ Back to Hoops—False start.

⚑ Blue Card—False start which results in pursuing active play.

3.3. STOPPAGES

3.3.1. Stopping Play

To stop play:

    A. The referee blows a whistle in paired short blasts.
    B. The timekeeper stops the game time and all other time clocks.
    C. All players currently in play must stop, drop their brooms, and hold their respective positions
        unless otherwise directed by a referee.
         i. The players maintain any balls they possessed at the stoppage whistle, unless the ball is
             turned over.
                                                                                                                   27
               a. Players must not take hold of or otherwise move any other balls during a stoppage.
         ii. Any players who are paused in an illegal position are adjusted immediately to a legal
              position.
         iii. Any players who accidentally and significantly moved after the whistle are returned to their
              location at the time the whistle was blown via referee directive.

⚑ Yellow Card—Ignoring referee directive.

3.3.2. Stoppage Procedures
While play is stopped:

    A. The head referee consults with other officials as necessary.
    B. The head referee adjudicates any fouls and communicates the type of foul to the players,
         scorekeeper, and spectators:
           i. Any player who receives penalty time is sent to the penalty box.
           ii. Any person who is ejected is removed from the player area.
    C. Any turnovers are enforced according to the turnover procedures described in Chapter 9.
    D. Any loose ball rolling or bouncing on the ground after the stoppage is returned to the spot an
         official first sees it on the ground after the whistle.
           i. Players may not stop these balls unless directed to by an official.
    E. Any loose live ball that was propelled and had not touched anything (including other players,
         equipment, or the ground) before the whistle to stop play is returned to the player who
         propelled it.
           i. This rule does not take effect if the ball is otherwise turned over.
           ii. If the propelling player is not eligible to receive the ball, it shall not be moved by this rule.
    F. Any loose ball out-of-bounds after the whistle to stop play follows the below inbounding
         procedures (also see 7.5.4. Inbounding Procedure).
           i. If a dodgeball is out-of-bounds during a stoppage, the closest eligible beater will be given the
                option to move to the inbounding point and be provided possession of the dodgeball.
                 a. If the closest eligible beater declines the ball, the ball will instead be moved
                     approximately 1 foot inside the boundary and left on the ground unpossessed.
           ii. If the Quadball is out-of-bounds during a stoppage, the closest eligible player will be moved
                to the inbounding point and provided possession of the Quadball.
           iii. The above two clauses do not apply to balls in the process of being inbounded through
                penalty adjudications, including turnovers and other rules moving the ball elsewhere.
    G. Any external interference is removed.
    H. Any other concerns, including injured players and defective equipment, are addressed.
    I. If the Quadball would be dead when play is restarted, it is given to the formerly defending
        keeper.

3.3.3. Restarting Play
                                                                                                                 28

To restart play:
    A. The head referee indicates to the players that play is about to resume by calling for the players to
       “Remount!”
          i. Players must remount their brooms where the brooms were left when play was stopped.
          ii. Players must stand at the call to remount.
                a. If two or more players on the ground each had a grip on a ball at the moment when play
                    was stopped, they still must stand. Once standing, each may retake hold of that ball.
                    They do not need to hold it in the same way they had on the ground.
          iii. Players may otherwise reposition themselves to prepare for the restart but must not commit
               a false restart.
                a. It is a false restart if a player does any of the following before the restart whistle:
                     1. Begin the forward motion of a throw.
                     2. Initiate new contact.
                     3. Begin to move off their location.
                     4. Attempting to directly affect a ball which the player does not solely possess.
                b. If there is a false restart, play remains stopped, and any player who moved is returned to
                    their previous location.
                c. The first false restart of a stoppage will result in a warning to all players on the field.
                     1. Any subsequent false restart by any player on the same stoppage shall result in a
                         penalty.
    B. The head referee blows one short whistle blast. On this whistle blast:
          i. Play resumes.
                a. Any player who is not mounted on their broom at the restart whistle is dismounted.
          ii. The timekeeper resumes the game time and all other time clocks.

⚑ Back to Hoops—Second false restart

3.3.4. Timeouts

    A. Once during regulation time, the speaking captain may call a timeout for a one minute
        stoppage.
    B. Procedure:
         i. A speaking captain informs the head referee they would like to use their timeout.
               a. When play is stopped, the head referee must first follow all procedures of 3.3.2 Stoppage
                   Procedures before starting the timeout.
               b. If requested during play, the head referee may stop play to accommodate a timeout if
                   they determine there is no active play immediately occurring.
         ii. The head referee shall blow one long whistle blast 45 seconds into the timeout.
         iii. After the completion of the timeout, the head referee shall resume play using the standard
              restart procedure (see: 3.3.3. Restarting Play).
                                                                                                            29


3.4. REGULATING GAME TIME

3.4.1. Game Time

Game time is measured beginning from the first “B” sound of brooms up.

    A. The game time, and any time associated with it, must be paused for all stoppages of play
        and resumed when play is resumed.

3.4.2. Regulation
Regulation time consists of two periods separated by a one minute intermission.

3.4.3. Seeker Floor
The seeker floor is the first period of the game.

    A. During the seeker floor, there are no seekers in play.
    B. The seeker floor period consists of 20 minutes of game time.
    C. Play will be stopped after 20 minutes via the following procedure:
         i. When the clock reaches 20 minutes of game time, the timekeeper will alert the head referee.
         ii. The head referee will allow play to continue until the end of the current drive.
              a. If the Quadball is dead, play will be stopped immediately for the intermission.
         iii. The game clock will continue to run until the head referee stops play.
         iv. If a stoppage occurs due to a penalty by the defending team during the final 10 seconds
             before 20 minutes of game time, the timekeeper must reset the game clock to 10 seconds
             remaining in the period.

 3.4.4. Intermission

    A. The head referee will stop play for one minute once the last possession of the seeker floor period
       ends.
    B. Once all stoppage procedures are completed (see: 3.3.2. Stoppage Procedures) the one
       minute intermission starts.
    C. During the intermission:
         i. All clocks remain stopped.
         ii. The head referee confers with both teams to confirm the ability to continue establishing a
              legal set of players, and whether either team wishes to concede, beginning with the team
              with the lower score.
                   a. If the teams are tied, begin with the team that lost the coin toss.
         iii. The head referee will establish and announce a set score of 60 points over the current
                                                                                                             30
            leading score.
             a. This set score should be displayed at the score table where it can be easily seen by both
                teams for the remainder of the game.
        iv. A seeker from each team must report to the timekeeper by the restart of play.
        v. The flag runner must enter the player area.
    D. Resuming after an intermission
        i. The head referee shall blow one long whistle blast 45 seconds into the intermission.
        ii. After the completion of the intermission, the head referee shall resume play using the restart
            procedure described in 3.3.3. Restarting Play.

⚑ Speaking Captain Blue Card—Illegal set of players




3.4.5. Flag Period

After intermission, play will continue in the same manner as in the seeker floor but with the addition
of the flag runner, seekers, and a set score.

   A. After 10 seconds of the flag period, the timekeeper releases the seekers into play from their
      respective penalty boxes.
          a. The seekers may exit the penalty box on the first “s” sound of “seekers released.”
          b. A seeker who enters the pitch before being released by the timekeeper has committed a
              false start and must serve the penalty time as a seeker, unless they complete the knockout
              procedure before interacting with play.
   B. Catching the flag
          a. When a flag catch is confirmed as good the catching team earns 35 points.
          b. The flag runner then leaves the player area.
          c. Seekers return to their benches as substitutes.
          d. If a seeker would be serving time in the penalty box when play resumes, they must
              immediately switch positions with a player in play other than the keeper. They serve the
              remainder of the penalty in that position and the new seeker returns to the bench as a
              substitute.
   C. The game will end when either team reaches the set score (see: 3.4.4.C.iii.)
          a. The winner is the team with more points.



⚑ Blue Card—False start.

3.5. FORFEITS

3.5.1. Declaring a Forfeit
                                                                                                           31

  A. The head referee must declare a game forfeit if:
        i. The speaking captain of a team officially requests a forfeit.
         ii. A team refuses to resume a suspended game without the agreement of their opponent and
             the tournament director.
        iii. A forfeit penalty is earned.
  B. A game may be declared a forfeit due to violations of league or tournament policy, up to
  tournament director determination.
  C. In the event of a forfeit:
        i. The game is over immediately and the forfeiting team is declared the losing team.

3.6. SUSPENDED GAMES

3.6.1. Declaring a Suspended Game
   A. The head referee or tournament director may declare a game suspended due to dangerous external
       interference, or extreme unsporting conduct as described in 6.6. Unsporting Conduct
   B. When a game is suspended, the scorekeeper and timekeeper must record the current game,
       score, players in play, and which players possess which game balls, and provide to the
       tournament director.
   C. Suspended games should be resumed as soon as it has become safe to do so, up to
tournament director discretion.

3.6.2. Resuming a Suspended Game
  A. If any of the game’s original officials are unavailable, the tournament director or head referee
      shall ensure they are replaced.
  B. All players in play at the suspension must line up behind their respective keeper zone lines.
         i. If, while play was suspended, a player who was in play became unavailable to play for any
             reason, another player on the roster may replace them.
  C. Game balls must be given to the appropriate players based on the possession information recorded
      at the time the game was suspended.
         i. Any balls which were not possessed when play was stopped shall be placed at one of the four
             ball positions, filling the inner positions first, followed by the outer positions.
               a. If the Quadball was unpossessed, it must go on an inner position.
  D. If the suspension occurred after the seekers were released, the flag runner should enter the player
      area before the game resumes and the seekers must line up behind their keeper zone lines.
  E. The head referee begins play by following the restart procedure with all players in their keeper
      zone (with any possessed balls)
      i. Any unpossessed balls will be placed on the midline in their starting positions.

3.6.3. Abandoned Games
                                                                                                               32

   A. If a suspended game cannot be resumed during the event at which it is being held, the tournament
      director must declare the game abandoned.
   B. If both teams and the tournament director mutually decide to not restart a suspended game, then
       the tournament director may declare the game abandoned and report to USQ.
          i. If one or both teams refuses to resume play without the agreement of the opposing team and
              the tournament director, the team(s) refusing to play shall be declared to have forfeited the
              game.




4. Scoring
4.1. GOAL SCORING

4.1.1. Good Goal

Ten points are scored for a team when the goal is confirmed as good by the Head Referee.

   A. All of these conditions must be met for a goal to be counted as good:
         i. The whole Quadball passed through one of the hoops.
              a. Goals may be scored through either side of the hoops.
         ii. The Quadball was neither dead nor unscorable (5.6.3 Unscorable Quadball).
         iii. The goal did not occur between a foul resulting in a red card, a yellow card, or a turnover by
             any member of the scoring team and the time the penalty card was awarded.
         iv. The scoring player did not commit a foul immediately before receiving the Quadball or while
             in contact with a live Quadball.
         v. The hoop was neither dislodged nor otherwise unplayable (see: 4.3.1. Scoring Through a
             Dislodged Hoop).
   B. The Quadball becomes dead as soon as a good goal has been scored.
   C. The head referee confirms that a goal is good by blowing one long whistle blast and raising both
       arms.

4.1.2. Goaltending

   A. A play is considered goaltending, and is scored as if the Quadball had gone through the hoop, if
       a chaser, other than the keeper, touches the Quadball from the opposite side of the hoop from
       the Quadball’s current position or where the Quadball entered the hoop.

4.2. RESTARTING AFTER A GOAL
                                                                                                                33

4.2.1. Dead Quadball

After a goal is scored, the Quadball is dead until the keeper restart procedure described in 4.2.2 Keeper Restart
is completed.

   A. Any player on the formerly defending team may carry or pass the dead Quadball to the keeper in
       that keeper’s own keeper zone, but may not otherwise interact with the dead Quadball.
          i. Substitutes may pass the dead Quadball to their keeper in this manner, but must always remain
              in the substitution area or bench while doing so.
          ii. The formerly offensive team may not interact with the dead Quadball, unless they are
              providing it to the opposing team at the request of the formerly defending team or an official.
   B. Players shall not be penalized for playing as if the Quadball is live before the goal is
       confirmed by the Head Referee.
          i. This shall not apply if the player is ruled to be acting with the intent to affect the restart
              of the Quadball game.
   C. If a penalty turns over a dead Quadball, the Quadball becomes live upon the restart after the
       turnover.

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally interacting with a dead Quadball

4.2.2. Keeper Restart
   A. The keeper must possess the Quadball in their own keeper zone to make it live if:
         i. The Quadball is touched by anyone else after the goal.
         ii. The Quadball leaves the pitch boundaries.
         iii.The Quadball enters the opposing team’s half.
   B. The referee shall pass the Quadball to the keeper either at their request or if the keeper must
      possess the Quadball in their zone and doing so would expedite the Quadball restart.
   C. The head referee shall blow one short whistle blast to indicate the Quadball has been made live by
      the keeper’s possession.

4.3. BROKEN OR FALLEN HOOPS

4.3.1. Scoring Through a Dislodged Hoop

A hoop that has become dislodged cannot be scored upon.

   A. A hoop is dislodged if:
         i. The hoop loop touches the ground or the hoop otherwise comes to a rest even temporarily in
             a non-upright position, including on top of a player.
        ii. The hoop loop detaches from the pole, or the pole detaches from the base.
        iii. Any part of the hoop breaks such that it cannot serve its function.
                                                                                                            34
  B. If a hoop is in the process of being dislodged when the Quadball passes completely through
      it, the goal is good.
  C. A hoop that is turned so that the hoop loop is no longer in line with the goal line is not
      dislodged and may be scored upon.
         i. Turned hoops must be returned to the proper position once active play leaves the area.
  D. A dislodged hoop must be fixed and returned to its correct position before a goal may again be
      scored on that hoop.

4.3.2. Dislodged Hoop Procedure

When a hoop is dislodged, play generally continues.

  A. If a hoop is dislodged and any of the following occur, play must be stopped.
         i. A broken hoop poses a threat to the safety of the players.
         ii. A broken hoop requires extra parts or an unusually long time to fix and the team
              defending that broken hoop is the offensive team.
               a. The head referee may wait for a lull in play to initiate this stoppage.
         iii. All three hoops in the same keeper zone are dislodged.
  B. Any dislodged hoops shall be reset to their proper positions during all stoppages.
  C. If play is not stopped for a dislodged hoop, it shall be fixed while play has moved away from the
     area.
  D. The Quadball carrier may request play be stopped to fix an opponent’s dislodged hoop if the
     Quadball carrier is in their own half of the player area and is not contacted by an opposing player.

4.3.3. Dislodging, Moving, and Resetting Hoops

  A. Players may not reset their opponent’s dislodged hoops.
  B. Players may not act recklessly, resulting in hoop dislodgment.
  C. Players may not repeatedly dislodge hoops, or it shall be judged as reckless.
  D. A player may not move or alter a hoop to affect whether the Quadball will pass through it.
  E. The above rules do not apply in the following instances:
          i. A hoop is unintentionally dislodged or moved by a thrown ball.
          ii. An offensive chaser dislodges a hoop while attempting a contested score.
  F. If a player illegally dislodges a hoop while successfully attempting a goal, that goal shall not be
       negated by the penalty for dislodging the hoop.
  G. A player may not intentionally dislodge a hoop.

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally resetting an opponent’s hoop

⚑ Yellow Card—Recklessly dislodging a hoop

⚑ Red Card—Intentionally dislodging, moving or altering a hoop
                                                                                                           35


4.4. THE FLAG CATCH
4.4.1. The Flag Catch

Thirty-five points are scored for a team that caught the flag after the catch is confirmed good

   A. A flag catch is confirmed when all of these conditions are met:
         i. A seeker detached the flag from the flag runner and held sole possession of the flag during
             the instant that the flag was separated from the flag runner.
         ii. The flag was securely attached to the shorts of the flag runner before the catch.
         iii. The flag runner was not down at the time of the catch according to 8.4.1. Downed Flag
              Runner.
         iv. The seeker did not catch the flag after committing a foul and the time that the penalty for
              that foul was administered.
         v. The catch did not occur between a foul resulting in a card or turnover by any member of the
              scoring team and the time the penalty for that foul was administered.
         vi. The flag runner was not physically impeded by any game official or member of the catching
             team.
               a. Physical impediments caused solely by legal actions listed under 8.5.1. Seeker
                   Interactions with the Flag Runner shall be ignored.
         vii. The seeker was not knocked out at the time of the catch.
         viii. The seekers did not simultaneously remove the flag from the flag runner.
         ix. Play was not stopped when the flag was caught.

4.4.2. Signaling the Catch
   A. If the head referee or lead assistant referee believes that there may have been a good flag catch,
      play must be stopped.
         i. The head referee will confer with the crew as needed and either confirm or deny the catch.


4.5. CLOSELY TIMED PLAYS
4.5.1. Closely Timed Plays

   A. When a score and either a foul by the scoring team or another valid score by either team occur in
      quick succession, the head referee must determine which happened first.
          a. Only statements from game officials can be treated as evidence.
          b. If, and only if, there is no evidence whatsoever available as to which event occurred
              first, the head referee may declare the events synchronous.
          c. If a score-negating foul and an otherwise good score are declared synchronous, the
              score shall be disallowed.
                                                                                                            36
          d. If two good scores are declared synchronous, both scores must be counted.




5. Dodgeballs and the Knockout Effect
5.1. THE BROOM
5.1.1. Mounting the Broom

  A. All players must be mounted on a broom in order to participate in play.
  B. To mount the broom, the player must have their broom between their legs.
  C. The player is dismounted when:
         a. Their broom (or arm that is holding the broom) no longer crosses the plane between the
             player’s legs OR
         b. Their broom lays flat on the ground without the player’s hand underneath it.

5.1.2. Dismounting
  A. If a player becomes dismounted while in play, the player is immediately knocked out and must
     follow the knockout procedure described in 5.3. The Knockout Procedure.
       i. If a player is dismounted by the illegal actions of an opponent, an official may allow the
           player to remount and continue play. If the player does not immediately remount, then they
           must follow the knockout procedure.

5.2. KNOCKING OUT PLAYERS

5.2.1. Incurring the Knockout Effect

  A. A player is “knocked out” when any part of the player or their broom is struck by an opponent’s live
     dodgeball.
         a. This includes being struck on the player’s hair, clothing, or equipment other than a game
            ball.
         b. These players are not knocked out when struck by an opponent’s live dodgeball:
                i.   Protected keepers according to 7.2.2. Keeper-Specific Powers.
               ii.   Beaters with knockout immunity according to 5.5.2. Claiming Knockout
                     Immunity.
              iii.   Inbounding players according to 7.5.4. Inbounding Procedure.
                         1. This includes inbounding chasers according to 7.5.5 Determining the
                             Inbounding Player.
         c. Beaters who are not immune may delay dismounting to attempt to catch the dodgeball
                                                                                                                37
              that struck them, until it becomes dead according to: 5.4.3. Struck Beater.
    B. Once knocked out, players must immediately follow the knockout procedure described in 5.3.1.
       The Knockout Procedure.
           a. i. Players must not significantly impact play while knocked out

⚑ Yellow Card—Significantly impacting play while knocked out

5.2.2. Live Dodgeball

To cause the knockout effect, a dodgeball must be live.

    A. To be live, a dodgeball must:
         i. Either be thrown, kicked, or otherwise intentionally propelled by a beater or be intentionally
              dropped by a beater when not required to be dropped by a rule.
         ii. Must not have been in contact with an opponent at the moment it was released, or otherwise
              finished being propelled.
         iii. Must not have touched the ground or any hoop base, become out-of-bounds, or been
              caught.
               a. In these cases, the dodgeball is live until the action indicated has occurred.
         iv. Must not have been stripped by an opponent’s body, another dodgeball, or the Quadball.
    B. Any dodgeball that is not live is considered dead.

5.2.3. Held Dodgeballs

    A. A beater may not attempt to deceive an opponent by contacting them using a held
        dodgeball.
         i. Incidental contact with a held dodgeball shall not be penalized.

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally contacting an opponent with a held dodgeball

5.2.4. Safe Calls
If a player is struck by a dodgeball which cannot knock them out, such as a dodgeball most recently made live by
themselves or their teammate, the referee shall call that player “safe” or “clear” unless they otherwise become
knocked out.

    A. Players struck by a dodgeball must begin the knockout procedure immediately unless the player
       is a struck beater attempting to catch the live dodgeball that hit them.
    B. If the player dismounts due to being struck by a dodgeball but is then called “safe” or “clear,” the
       player may remount at an official’s direction and continue play.
    C. If the player fails to begin the knockout procedure immediately, a penalty may apply.
          i. If the final call on that dodgeball hit is “safe” or “clear,” play shall continue and no penalty
                                                                                                                  38
                shall apply.
         ii. If an official calls the player “safe” or “clear” but the call changes to “beat,” the player shall
              receive no penalty for failing to dismount as long as the player responds to the “beat” call
              by dismounting.
         iii. If no referee called the player “safe” or “clear” and the final call on that dodgeball hit is
              “beat,” the player shall be considered to be willfully ignoring being knocked out.
               a. If the official believes that the player was unaware that the dodgeball touched them, then
                   the official may treat it as an unnoticed knockout (see: 5.3.1. Repeat Procedure).
                    1. A player’s belief that they are otherwise safe from the dodgeball shall not be taken
                        into consideration when determining any appropriate penalty.

⚑ Yellow Card—Ignoring being knocked out

5.2.5. Headbeats

Propelled live dodgeballs whose first contact is with the head or neck of an opponent are
considered headbeats.

    A. A headbeat is illegal unless:
         i. The struck player changes speed or direction into the path of the dodgeball after the
              possessing beater has begun the final natural motion to propel the dodgeball.
               a. This includes moving a part of the body if that action moves their head into the path of
                  the dodgeball.
         ii. The headbeat makes contact with negligible force.
         iii. The headbeat was propelled when the opposing player was at least 6 yards away.
    B. A player who is struck by an illegal headbeat will be instructed to remount by an official.

⚑ Yellow Card—Illegal headbeat

⚑ Red Card—Egregious contact (6.3.13)

5.3. THE KNOCKOUT PROCEDURE

5.3.1. The Knockout Procedure

Knocked out players remain knocked out until they complete the following procedure, in order:

   A. Immediately drop any ball they possess and dismount their broom.
         a. The player must not propel the ball unless completing a natural motion already begun
              according to 5.6.2. Natural motion conditions.
         b. A dodgeball dropped in this way is dead.
         c. A Quadball dropped in this way is unscorable.
   B. Touch the loop or pole of the center (6ft) hoop.
                                                                                                              39
          a. The player must touch the hoop with some part of their body, not with their broom.
          b. If the 6ft hoop is dislodged, a player may tag in at any part of it still attached to the
             hoop base, including the base itself.
   C. Remount their broom before leaving the vicinity of the hoops.
   D. Knocked out players must avoid interactions with game balls and other players until they complete this
      procedure, in this order

⚑ Repeat Procedure—Violating the knockout procedure without interacting with play

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally interacting with play while knocked out

⚑ Yellow Card—Intentionally or repeatedly violating the knockout procedure

5.3.2. Making Contact as a Knocked Out Player

   A. A knocked out player may not initiate any physical contact, other than incidental contact.
         i. If a player is in the final motion of making contact before becoming knocked out by a
             dodgeball, they may complete that motion if it could not reasonably be stopped.
               a. The player must immediately act to cease that contact.
               b. If a player takes two steps between being knocked out and initiating contact with an
                   opponent, then that contact is illegal.
         ii. While knocked out, it is illegal for a player to initiate a push, body block, charge, or wrap.
   B. If a knocked out player is already in contact with an opponent before becoming knocked out, they
       must immediately act to cease contact safely and with as little effect to the opponent as
       reasonably possible.

⚑ Yellow Card—Illegal contact while knocked out




5.4. REDIRECTING AND CATCHING LIVE DODGEBALLS

5.4.1. Blocking and Batting Balls
      A player in possession of a ball may attempt to block or bat an incoming live dodgeball with the
      ball in their possession:
   A. A block or bat does not affect whether the dodgeball is live.
   B. A dead Quadball may not be used to block or bat a dodgeball.
   C. Players may not intentionally use a held ball to block or bat a Quadball, a dead dodgeball, or a
      dodgeball that was made live by a teammate.
           a. If the referee determines that the player was not reasonably aware that the dodgeball was
               either dead or made live by their own teammate, and the play was otherwise legal, the
               player shall not be penalized.
                                                                                                                   40

⚑ Blue Card—Illegal bat

5.4.2. Swatting Dodgeballs

Any attempt to swat or otherwise intentionally propel a live dodgeball, other than through the use of
another ball, is considered a dodgeball swat.

   A. Beaters and seekers may swat or make any attempt to alter the course of a live dodgeball, under
      the below conditions:
         i. A struck beater may not swat any dodgeball, except as part of an attempt to catch it
              according to 5.4.3. Struck Beater.
         ii. A seeker may not begin the swatting motion of their swat after they are subject to the
              knockout effect. Judging a swatting motion will follow rules of natural motion.
               a. After a swat, if the first contact of the swatted ball is out-of-bounds (including a player),
                   the swat shall be rules as intentionally propelling a ball out-of-bounds.
         iii. A beater who is in possession of a dodgeball may not swat another dodgeball.
               a. This rule does not prohibit batting a live dodgeball with a held dodgeball according to
                   5.4.1. Blocking and Batting Dodgeballs.
         iv. If the dodgeball was already live, it remains live for the team whose beater initially made the
         dodgeball live.
               a. If it was live for the opposing team, the swatting beater becomes a struck beater.

⚑ Dodgeball Turnover—Illegal dodgeball swat

⚑ Blue Card—Propelling a ball with the intent of sending any ball out-of-bounds

5.4.3. Struck Beater

A non-immune beater is a struck beater, rather than knocked out, from the time they are hit by an
opponent’s live dodgeball until that dodgeball becomes dead. A struck beater is subject to the following
restrictions:

    A. A struck beater is unable to make a dodgeball live.
    B. A struck beater must immediately drop any dodgeball which they are holding.
         i. The player must not propel the dodgeball, unless completing a natural motion according to
             5.6.2. Natural Motion Conditions.
    C. A struck beater must either attempt to catch the live dodgeball that struck them or immediately
       follow the knockout procedure after dropping any dodgeball formerly in their possession.
         i. A beater is allowed to propel a dodgeball farther into the air in the process of attempting a catch.
         ii. A struck beater is not eligible to be a helpless receiver.
         iii. After the initial hit, any intentional attempt by the struck beater to change the direction of
             any dodgeball, in any manner, other than to attempt to catch the dodgeball that struck them
                                                                                                              41
             is interacting with play after beat..
   D. If a struck beater takes any actions other than those outlined in 5.4.3.A. through 5.4.3.C., they are
      subject to the same rules and penalties for those actions as a knocked out player.
   E. If a struck beater catches the live dodgeball that hit them, that beater is no longer subject to the
      knockout effect from that dodgeball.
   F. A struck beater who fails to catch the live dodgeball that hit them must immediately begin the
      knockout procedure.

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally interacting with play while knocked out
                                                                                                              42


5.5. THE THIRD DODGEBALL AND KNOCKOUT IMMUNITY

5.5.1. The Third Dodgeball
When one team has possession of two dodgeballs and the remaining dodgeball is unpossessed and
dead, the dead dodgeball becomes the Third Dodgeball.

    A. This ball remains the Third Dodgeball until:
         i. A beater makes a reasonable beat attempt OR
         ii. A beater loses a dodgeball due to the direct actions of an opposing player OR
         iii.A beater without a dodgeball gains possession of any dodgeball.
    B. Players on the team that possess two dodgeballs may not commit third dodgeball
         interference.
         i. It is third dodgeball interference if either:
               a. A player from the possessing team attempts to move the third dodgeball OR
               b. A player from the possessing team physically prevents or delays the other team from
                   getting to the third dodgeball
         ii. The two dodgeballs turned over for third dodgeball interference are chosen at the referee’s
             discretion, but should:
               a. Include the (previously) Third Dodgeball.
               c. Be relevant to active play.

⚑ Back to Hoops and Double Dodgeball Turnover—Third dodgeball interference

5.5.2. Claiming Knockout Immunity

When there is a Third Dodgeball, a beater on the team with no dodgeballs may raise a hand above their
shoulder, fist closed, to claim immunity from being knocked out by live dodgeballs.

    A. It is an improper immunity claim if a player claims immunity when the opposing team has two
        dodgeballs, but:
          i. The remaining dodgeball is still live OR
          ii. The third dodgeball was released by that player without making a reasonable beat
              attempt OR
          iii.Their team’s other beater is also claiming immunity.
               a. If both beaters on a team attempt to claim immunity, one of them must put their fist back
                   down to avoid a penalty. If neither beater puts their fist down, only one shall be
                   penalized.
    B. An immunity claim is invalid if a beater claims immunity when there is no third dodgeball, unless
        two dodgeballs are possessed by the opposing team and the remaining dodgeball was made live
        by the opposing team.
                                                                                                            43
         i. If the claim was unintentionally invalid, and did not affect play, the player may instead
             be penalized for a minor invalid immunity claim.
    C. An immune beater is not immune to dodgeballs made live before immunity was claimed.
    D. If an opponent begins the final singular natural motion on an attempted knockout before the
       immune beater loses their immunity, the formerly immune beater cannot be knocked out by that
       attempt.

⚑ Back to Hoops—Improper immunity claim

⚑ Back to Hoops—Minor invalid immunity claim

⚑ Blue Card—Invalid immunity claim

5.5.3. Immunity Limitations

While a beater is claiming immunity, they are subject to the following restrictions:

    A. The beater must directly and immediately proceed to gain possession of the third
        dodgeball.
         i. The beater may approach the ball from any direction they prefer.
         ii. Taking any other action while immune is an immunity violation.
         iii.The beater loses their immunity once they gain possession of the dodgeball.
              a. The beater remains immune while attempting to pick up the third dodgeball, even if their
                   fist is lowered in doing so.
    B. They may not voluntarily give up their immunity and must continue pursuing the dodgeball
       unless:
              i. they lose their immunity by rule OR
              ii. their partner has also claimed immunity.
    C. When one of the exceptions occur, the beater must immediately give up their immunity
              i. Failure to give up immunity due to an exception is an immunity violation.

⚑ Blue Card—Immunity violation

5.6. NATURAL MOTION

5.6.1. Natural Motion

When a player is knocked out or becomes a struck beater, that player may finish one singular natural
motion that they had already started if that motion cannot be reasonably stopped.

5.6.2. Natural Motion Conditions
                                                                                                         44

   A. For natural motion rules to apply:
           a. The player must already be in contact with the ball when knocked out AND
           b. The player must release any possessed ball as part of the singular natural motion begun
               before becoming knocked out.
           c. Any motion begun after the player is knocked out is not natural motion.
   B. If a player propels a ball immediately after being knocked out without meeting the above
      conditions for natural motion, it is a natural motion violation.

⚑ Turnover—Natural motion violation

⚑ Blue Card— Illegally interacting with play while knocked out

⚑ Yellow Card—Willfully ignoring being knocked out

5.6.3. Unscorable Quadball

If a player is touching the Quadball when they become knocked out and releases it or otherwise propels
it according to natural motion, the Quadball becomes an unscorable Quadball.

   A. An unscorable Quadball cannot result in a goal.
   B. The Quadball remains live and play continues normally.
   C. The Quadball becomes scorable again once:
         i. It is touched by an eligible chaser teammate of the player who released it OR
         ii. It is possessed by any player.
                                                                                                              45


6. Physical Contact and Interactions
6.1. DEFINITIONS
Contact - Any situation in which two (or more) players of opposing teams are physically touching.

Incidental Contact - Contact that occurs for a short duration and does not affect the overall state of the
game. Incidental contact should not transfer enough force between players to move a player from their
current position.

Forceful Contact - Contact that involves a significant transfer of momentum between two players.
Forceful contact generally involves enough force to move a player from their current position.

Tackle - A tackle is the act of using a wrap to bring a player to the ground.

Push - Contact that consists of extending an arm that is in contact with an opponent.

Charge - Contact that consists of a player with momentum initiating forceful contact without attempting
a wrap or tackle.

Bumping - a player using their hips and shoulders to gain a more advantageous position than their
opponent while the two are moving in the same direction. Bumping is legal contact.

Stationary - A player whose feet are set and who has no horizontal momentum.

Pick - Contact that consists of a player standing in the path of an opponent, usually in an effort to force
the opponent into a less advantageous position.

Reckless - Any action that does not take the safety of players into account.

Egregious - Excessive or intentional poor sportsmanship such that it compromises the safety of players.
                                                                                                                  46

6.2. STANDARD CONTACT PENALTIES
6.2.1 Contact Fouls
Fouls listed as a “Contact Foul” have the following nuances:

   A. The default penalty for a contact foul is a yellow card.
   B. Incidental contact may receive a back to hoops penalty instead of a yellow card.
   C. Violent, dangerous, or egregious fouls receive a red card instead of a yellow card.

6.2.2. Contact “From Behind”
   A. For contact to not be considered “from behind,” the navel of the contacting player must be in front of the
   frontal plane of the contacted player. The frontal plane is the plane that bisects the body into a front and back
   half.
         i. As long as this occurs, the actual first point of contact may be made on the front or the back
             of the contacted player.
   B. Once contact has been legally established, a player may continue contact even when it results in
       contact from behind, so long as contact is not broken.
         i. This includes changing the type of contact.
   C. Contact is not considered “from behind” when a player leads with their back or spins or turns just
       prior to contact.

⚑ Contact Foul—Charging from behind

⚑ Contact Foul—Pushing from behind

⚑ Contact Foul—Wrapping with momentum from behind

6.3. COMMON CONTACT FOULS
⚑ Contact Foul—Making contact with an opponent’s head, neck, or groin.

⚑ Contact Foul—Initiating contact at or below the knees of an opponent.

⚑ Contact Foul—Making contact using the crown of the head.

⚑ Contact Foul—Kicking, tripping, sliding into, or diving into an opponent.

⚑ Contact Foul—Jumping or climbing onto a player.

⚑ Contact Foul—Lifting a player off the ground.

⚑ Contact Foul—Contacting an opponent of another position.
                                                                                                                47

⚑ Contact Foul—Contacting an opponent's broom.

⚑ Contact Foul—Intentionally contacting the flag runner, except for seekers.

6.3.1. Wrapping

A wrap consists of encircling any part of an opponent with an arm or arms. The arm includes the hand.

    A. It is illegal to wrap an opponent who is not in possession of a ball.
    B. If a player in possession of a ball is being wrapped and releases possession of the ball:
            a. The referee must shout “ball out” to signal to the wrapping player that the ball has been
                 released.
            b. Once aware of the ball being released, the wrapping player cannot continue contact
    C. It is illegal to pull on an opponent’s clothing.
    D. A yank is an illegal form of contact wherein a wrap or grab is applied to an opposing player’s
       arm and sudden, rapid force is applied.
            a. A wrap may not be initiated from behind unless the wrapping player is stationary

⚑ Contact Foul—Illegal Wrap


6.3.2. Tackling

A tackle is the act of using a wrap to bring a player to the ground.

   A. It is illegal to tackle an opponent who is not in possession of a ball.
   B. It is the tackling player's responsibility to attempt to ensure the safety of the player being tackled.
      It is illegal to tackle an opponent without controlling their and your momentum.
             a. Illegal tackles where players are lifted or slammed are considered dangerous tackles.

⚑ Contact Foul—Reckless Tackle

⚑ Red Card—Reckless or dangerous tackle




6.3.3. Pushing

A push consists of applying force upon an opponent with an extending arm, be it extended during or
immediately preceding the push

   A. Only one arm may be used to push.
   B. It is illegal to push using the point of an elbow.
                                                                                                                 48

    C. It is illegal to push from behind

⚑ Contact Foul—Pushing with two arms or the point of an elbow

⚑ Contact Foul—Pushing from behind

6.3.4. Charging

Significant forceful contact into an opponent that is not a push, wrap, body block, or tackle..

   A. It is illegal to charge from behind
   B. It is illegal to charge an opponent when neither the player nor their opponent have a ball.
   C. It is illegal to initiate a charge using a single point of the body, such as leading with the point of a
       shoulder or elbow.
           i. Side by side point-of-shoulder to point-of-shoulder contact is allowed.
   D. It is illegal for the charging player’s feet to leave the ground while executing a charge in a
       manner that they spring forward and upward into their opponent.
   E. It is illegal to charge a stationary opponent
        i. If the stationary player has not been stationary long enough for the charging player to adjust
        their movement, that charging player will not be penalized.

⚑ Contact Foul—Illegal charge

6.3.5. Helpless Receiver

A receiver who is in the process of catching a ball (that their team made live) is in the air is
considered helpless. A player does not have to leave the ground in order to be considered a
helpless receiver. A receiver remains helpless until they establish their footing on the ground and
have time to brace for contact.

   A. A helpless receiver may not be pushed, wrapped, charged, or tackled by any opponent.
   B. A player who the referee determines to have thrown a ball to themselves shall not be considered a
      helpless receiver on that throw.

⚑ Contact Foul—Pushing or wrapping a helpless receiver

⚑ Red Card—Charging or tackling a helpless receiver

6.3.6. Body Blocking

A body block consists of applying force to an opponent using body parts other than arms or hands not
pinned to the torso, where any significant force of the contact is applied after non-forceful contact has
already been established by the blocking player’s aforementioned body parts.
                                                                                                              49

    A. It is illegal to body block using the head or feet.
    B. It is illegal to extend the point of the elbow or knee into an opponent during a body block.

⚑ Contact Foul—Illegal body block

6.3.7. Picking

When a player stands in the path of an opponent, usually in an effort to force the opponent into a less
advantageous position, without initially engaging in a push, charge, tackle, or wrap it is considered a
pick.

   A. It is illegal to pick a player of another position.
   B. It is illegal to extend a single point of one’s body during a pick, such as the elbow or point of the
       shoulder, causing the picked player to run into it.

⚑ Contact Foul—Interpositional contact

⚑ Contact Foul—Illegal pick

6.3.8. Stealing
A steal consists of a player’s attempt to extract a ball from an opponent by either stripping or poking it
loose.

     A. A player may not wind up or swing at the ball in an attempt to punch it loose.
     B. During a steal attempt, while possession of the ball is shared, contact that requires possession of
        a ball is allowed by a player until they lose direct control of the ball.
     C. Incidental contact from behind is allowed during a steal attempt.

⚑ Contact Foul—Winding up or swinging in an attempt to steal

6.3.9. Kicking

It is legal to kick a ball that they may possess, unless they perform an illegal or dangerous kick:

     A. It is illegal to kick a player.
     B. Kicking a ball that an opponent is touching with anything other than their feet is illegal.
     C. It is illegal to kick the flag.

⚑ Contact Foul—Dangerous kick

6.3.10. Sliding and Diving

Players may slide and dive. However, it is illegal to:
                                                                                                               50

   A. Slide or dive into an opposing player.
   B. Slide or dive toward an opponent or into the path of an opponent in a way that forces the opponent
       to change their movement to avoid the slide or dive.
         i. The opponent does not count as forced if they have to take two or more steps before they
             would contact the sliding or diving player.
              a. This is determined once the slide intersects their path, not when the slide or dive is
                 initiated.

⚑ Contact Foul—Sliding or diving into an opposing player

6.3.11. Hurdling

Jumping or diving fully over any person is considered hurdling.

   A. It is illegal for a player to hurdle or attempt to hurdle any person who is standing up.
          i. If the hurdling player was forced by the sudden movement of the hurdled person to make an
              illegal hurdle to avoid more dangerous contact, the hurdle shall not be penalized.
          ii. If a player jumps without attempting a hurdle but falls over another person due to being
                contacted while in the air, it shall not be ruled as a hurdle.

⚑ Contact Foul—Hurdling an opposing player

6.3.12. Contact Through a Teammate

    A. It is illegal for any player to primarily contact a teammate with the intent of causing or otherwise
       affecting that teammate’s physical interaction with any opponent.
    B. Incidental or secondary contact through a teammate shall not be penalized.

⚑ Contact Foul—Illegal contact through a teammate

6.3.13. Egregious Contact

Egregious contact is illegal. The following are always egregious contact:

   A. Greatly exceeding the necessary force to complete an action in a way that jeopardizes the safety of an
       opponent.
   B. Intentionally injuring another person.
   C. Striking or attempting to strike another person including but not limited to intentionally kneeing,
       elbowing, or headbutting an opponent.
   D. Intentionally physically contacting another person’s head, neck, or groin.
   E. Intentionally physically contacting an official other than the flag runner.
                                                                                                                   51

⚑ Ejection—Egregiously illegal contact against a teammate

⚑ Red Card—Egregiously illegal contact against someone who is not a teammate



6.4. RIGHT OF WAY

6.4.1. Interpositional Right of Way

Players of different positions may not interact with each other’s movement. The following rules
apply to these interactions:

   A. The following is the order of priority for right of way between two players of different
        positions from highest to lowest priority:
          i. A stationary player with a ball.
          ii. A stationary chaser without a ball.
          iii. A moving player with a ball.
          iv. A stationary beater or seeker without a ball.
          v. A moving player without a ball.
          vi. A knocked out player.
   B. Players with lower priority must yield to players with higher priority which may include moving out
        of the way.
          i. Players of lower priority who fail to yield are generally “at fault.”
   C. When two players of the same priority interact, the player whom the referee judges to have more
        directly instigated the interaction shall be deemed at fault.
           i. If the players are judged to be equally at fault for the interaction, no penalty is given.
   D. If a player clearly acts with the intent of causing an illegal interpositional interaction, that player
       shall be deemed at fault, regardless of their priority.
   E. If a player moves with the intent of causing an opponent to enter an illegal interpositional interaction
        with or yield to another player of equal or higher priority, that player shall be deemed at fault rather
        than either of the interacting parties.
   F. If the referee determines that there was not enough time for the at fault player to reasonably react and
        yield, the interaction is incidental and no penalty shall be given.
           i. This provision shall not activate if the at fault player could be reasonably expected to be
               aware or acted to ensure they would be unaware of the opposing player with whom they
               interacted.
   G. Only the at fault player is penalized for an illegal interpositional interaction.
           i. If the illegal interpositional interaction was accidental, and overall gameplay was unaffected,
               it is a minor illegal interpositional interaction and the player is sent back to hoops.

⚑ Back to Hoops—Minor illegal interpositional interaction
                                                                                                                  52

⚑ Yellow Card—Illegal interpositional interaction

⚑ Red Card—Violent or egregious illegal interpositional interaction

6.4.2. Interactions with Knocked Out Players

  A. It is illegal for any player to intentionally attempt to initiate contact, continue contact, or otherwise
      physically interact with a knocked out opponent.
         i. If contact was initiated before or as the knockout occurred, reasonable allowance shall be
              made for the player to safely disengage from the knocked out opponent.
         ii. If a knocked out player initiates contact with an opponent that is on broom, the broomed
              player will not be penalized for this contact.

⚑ Yellow Card—Illegally interacting with a knocked out opponent

⚑ Red Card—Egregiously illegally interacting with a knocked out opponent


6.5. UNSPORTING BEHAVIOR
6.5.1. Unsporting Conduct

  A. Players must not engage in unsporting conduct such as taunting or rude or antagonistic behavior
      with players, spectators, officials, or event staff.
  B. Use of explicit, vulgar, extreme, or abusive language, behavior or gestures at any time is
      considered unsporting conduct.
        i. It is egregious unsporting conduct if the language is directed at another person and any of
             the following are true:
              a. The language is extreme or abusive.
              b. The language includes vulgar words used for their meaning, rather than solely for
                  emphasis.
              c. The language is discriminatory, including but not limited to racial epithets, ethnic slurs, or
                  other phrases which demean or debase any person or group of people based on their race,
                  sex, gender, sexual orientation, religion, or country of origin.
        ii. It is egregious unsporting conduct to direct obscene, explicit, or vulgar gestures at another
             person.
        iii. Egregiously rude or hostile behavior, including directed threats or spitting, are
             egregious unsporting conduct.
  C. Unsporting conduct that is undirected or solely directed at one’s teammates or oneself is instead
      internal unsporting conduct and will be penalized if it is repeated use of explicit or vulgar
      language, or egregious.
                                                                                                            53

⚑ Yellow Card—Unsporting conduct

⚑ Red Card—Egregious unsporting conduct

⚑ Yellow Card—Repeated internal unsporting conduct

⚑ Ejection—Egregious internal unsporting conduct

6.5.2. Physical Altercations

It is illegal to engage in physical altercations with any person.

⚑ Ejection—Engaging in a physical altercation with a teammate

⚑ Red Card—Engaging in a physical altercation with an opponent, spectator, official, or event staffer

6.5.3. Serious Foul Play

It is illegal to commit serious foul play, including egregious conduct and flagrant cheating.

   A. If an instance of serious foul play cannot be attributed to a specific player, the speaking captain
       must receive the penalty.

⚑ Red Card—Serious foul play


7. Boundaries and Balls
7.1. USING THE BALLS

7.1.1. Use of the Ball

Players may possess, touch, kick, throw, or otherwise use the ball associated with their own
position.

   A. A player is considered to have possession of a ball when that player has sole and complete control
       of it.
         i. This includes when a player is the only player in contact with the ball during a kick.
         ii. Swatting a ball out of an opponent’s hands or out of the air is not considered possession.
              a. Swatting a ball that is on the ground is considered possession.
   B. Players may only possess, touch, kick, throw, or otherwise use one ball associated with their
       position at any given time.
                                                                                                                54
         i. A beater may temporarily possess two dodgeballs if they are in the process of
             catching a live dodgeball propelled by an opponent.
              a. The beater must drop one of the two dodgeballs immediately after completing the catch in
                 order to avoid being penalized.
   C. Players may not use a ball associated with their position to mimic the actions of a ball of a different
       position.
   D. Players may not use a ball of their position to intentionally interact with the flag runner.

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally using a ball of one’s own position

⚑ Yellow Card—Using a ball to intentionally interact with the flag runner

7.1.2. Interpositional Ball Interactions
Players may not possess, touch, kick, throw, or in any way use a ball not associated with their position
with the following exception:

    A. Any mounted player may allow a live dodgeball to hit them or intentionally get in the way of a
       live dodgeball.
            a. Players may allow a live dodgeball to bounce off of any part of their body or equipment
                at any angle.
            b. It is illegal for chasers and seekers to interact with a dead dodgeball.
                   i.    If the referee determines that the player was not reasonably aware that the
                         dodgeball was dead and the play was otherwise legal, the player shall not be
                         penalized.
            c. An attempt to propel a live dodgeball with any part of one’s body is considered a
                dodgeball swat.
            d. Beaters and seekers may swat a live dodgeball as long as the final motion before
                contacting the dodgeball begins before they are stuck (natural motion).
            e. It is illegal for chasers to swat a dodgeball.
    B. The following outlines specific violations of this rule:
    C. A mounted beater or seeker must avoid a propelled Quadball. Not doing so and being hit is a
       blue card.
            a. If the player attempts to avoid a propelled Quadball and fails but the overall play is not
                affected, the player shall instead be sent back to hoops.
            b. Intentionally moving into, or remaining in, the path of the Quadball to block it or
                prevent a goal is a yellow card.
            c. A player without time to reasonably avoid an incoming Quadball is not penalized for
                failing to avoid it.
    D. All players may legally possess a dead Quadball to return it to the formerly defending keeper
       after a score (see: 4.2.1. Dead Quadball).
    E. Unintentionally illegally acting on a ball in a manner that significantly affects the position
       or trajectory of that ball is a turnover.
                                                                                                                55

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally contacting a dead dodgeball

⚑ Blue Card—Illegal chaser swat

⚑ Turnover—Incidental interpositional ball interference

⚑ Back to Hoops and Turnover—Failure to avoid a propelled Quadball in a manner that does not affect play

⚑ Blue Card—Failure to avoid a propelled Quadball

⚑ Yellow Card—Interpositional ball interference

⚑ Red Card—Intentionally and illegally blocking a score

7.1.3. Interference by Substitutes and Knocked Out Players

Substitutes and knocked out players must make a reasonable effort, at the discretion of the referee,
not to interact with any ball.

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally failing to make a reasonable effort to avoid a ball

⚑ Red Card—Intentionally and illegally blocking a score




7.1.4. Dodgeball vs Quadball

   A. Players may not propel or use a held ball of their position to interact with a ball of another position
       with the following exceptions:
          i. Beaters may propel dodgeballs at a live Quadball.
          ii. Chasers may use a held or propelled Quadball to hit or deflect a live dodgeball.
               a. If the referee determines that the player was not reasonably aware that the airborne
                   dodgeball was dead and the play was otherwise legal, the player shall not be penalized.
   B. Any intentional illegal use of a held ball to interact with a ball not associated with one’s position
       is interpositional ball interference.
   C. Unintentionally and illegally acting on a ball not associated with one’s position by using a held ball
       in a manner that significantly affects the position or trajectory of that ball is incidental
       interpositional ball interference and results in a turnover of the affected ball.

⚑ Turnover—Incidental interpositional ball interference

⚑ Yellow Card—Interpositional ball interference
                                                                                                              56


7.2. KEEPER ZONE
7.2.1. Inside the Keeper Zone

A keeper with all parts of their body touching behind their own keeper zone line is considered to be in the
keeper zone until they touch on or outside the keeper zone line.

7.2.2. Keeper-Specific Powers

A keeper within their own keeper zone, except in the situation described in 7.2.2.B., is considered to be a
protected keeper.

   A. A protected keeper has the following powers:
        i. While a protected keeper has sole possession of the Quadball, opposing players may not
            contact, interact with, or attempt to steal the Quadball from the keeper (see: 6.3. Contact
            Legalities).
        ii. A protected keeper is immune from being knocked out by live dodgeballs.
   B. Once any player on the keeper’s team possesses the (live) Quadball outside their keeper zone:
        i. The keeper loses all powers listed above.
         ii. The powers listed above can be regained when their team’s drive ends.




7.3. OFFENSE, DEFENSE, AND DRIVES
7.3.1. Drives

   A. A drive is initiated for a team when one of the following occurs:
         i. A player on that team is the first player to gain possession of the Quadball at the
             beginning of a period.
         ii. A player on that team gains possession of the Quadball during the opposing team’s drive,
              thus ending the opposing team’s drive.
         iii. A player on that team makes the Quadball live after a good goal.
   B. A drive ends for a team when one of the following occurs.
         i. The opposing team gains possession of the Quadball, initiating their own drive.
         ii. A period ends.
         iii. A goal is scored for either team.

7.3.2. Offense and Defense
                                                                                                                 57

  A. During a team’s drive, they are the “offensive team.”
         i. The opposing team is the “defensive team.”

7.4. PACE OF PLAY

7.4.1. Delay of Game

Delay of game is defined as an attempt to stop or significantly impede the Quadball game from continuing. The
exact determination of what constitutes delay of game is at the discretion of the referee, within these guidelines:

  A. A beater or beaters may guard a Quadball to prevent the opposing team from gaining possession
     of it. However, a beater commits delay of game if they continue to protect the Quadball while
     their team’s chasers are making no reasonable attempt to retrieve it.
  B. Keeper delays:
         i. A protected keeper must directly and immediately advance the Quadball out of the keeper
              zone, attempt to complete a pass, or drop the Quadball to the ground.
         ii. After a goal, the keeper on the formerly defensive team must not substitute out of the game
              until they have made the Quadball live.
  C. The Quadball carrier must at least advance the Quadball at a normal walking pace until they
      have crossed the midfield line.
         i. If the Quadball carrier is taking a non direct path, their forward progress must equal or
             exceed the forward progress of a normal walking pace on a path perpendicular to the
             midfield line.
         ii. If the Quadball carrier is blocked by a defender, they may temporarily delay their forward
              progress but must clearly attempt to find a way to bypass the defender.
               a. The Quadball carrier is considered blocked by a defender if that defender is between the
                  Quadball carrier and any part of the defender’s endline and that defender is:
                    1. An opposing chaser or keeper within approximately 2 yards of the Quadball
                       carrier.
                    2. An opposing beater in possession of a dodgeball within approximately 4 yards of the
                       Quadball carrier.
  D. Stalling:
         i. On each drive, the chasers on the offensive team must act with the overall primary intent to
            score. Players in possession of the Quadball may not act with the overall primary intent to
            waste time for any reason.
   E. The head referee may issue a warning when they determine that the team is beginning to delay the
       game.
         i. Teams must respond immediately to this warning to avoid a penalty for delay of game.
            Multiple warnings may be given for delay of game during a single game, as the referee
            determines to be appropriate.
                                                                                                                58

⚑ Blue Card and Quadball Turnover—Delay of game

7.4.2. Stalled Quadball

A Quadball is considered stalled if the player(s) touching it is also touching the ground with any body parts
other than their feet or hands and is in contact with an opposing player.

    A. Upon a Quadball becoming stalled, a head referee must begin counting down from ten silently.
        If the Quadball is still stalled at the count of six, the head referee must count down from five
        out loud.
          i. If the Quadball ceases to be stalled at any point before the count of zero, the head referee
              ends their count.
    B. After the count of zero the head referee stops play and turns the Quadball over to the keeper
       defending the half the Quadball is currently in, in their keeper zone.
         i. If the keeper is not in their keeper zone, they shall be moved to the center hoop.
         ii. If the keeper is currently knocked out, they shall be remounted at the center hoop.
         iii. The keeper shall receive immunity (See: 7.2.2. Keeper-Specific Powers.)
7.4.3. Restrictor Lines
Teams are partially restricted from carrying or propelling the Quadball backward toward their own
hoops. The following rules apply:

   A. Each team has two restrictor lines during their drives, each of which extend completely across
       the width of the pitch:
          i. The team’s own keeper zone line is a hard restrictor line.
         ii. The midfield line is a soft restrictor line.
   B. The Quadball is considered to have crossed a restrictor line when it touches either the ground or an
       object or person that is on or past the line.
          i. A player touching the ground on both sides of the restrictor line is considered to have crossed
               the line.
   C. The Quadball cannot be moved backwards across the hard restrictor line with the following
      exceptions:
          i. The first action of a drive; either by throwing the ball or by walking it backwards if:
                 a. The ball does not also cross the midpoint restrictor line.
          ii. A defensive player deflects the Quadball, during or after the propulsion.
          iii. A defensive player strips the Quadball.
    D. If an offensive player carries or propels the Quadball backward across the midfield line for any
       reason, it shall be ruled a reset, with the following exceptions:
          i. If a defensive player deflects the Quadball, during or after the propulsion and before it
               travels backward across a restrictor line, this shall not be considered a reset.
                a. This includes deflections done with a dodgeball.
                                                                                                                  59
        ii. The player who initiates a drive may only carry or propel the Quadball backwards across one
            restrictor line immediately upon the beginning of the drive without it counting as a reset.
            a. This does not apply to the start of the first drive of the game.
        iii. This action is still subject to all other rules, including delay of game and stalling.
  E. Upon the first legal reset of each drive, the head referee shall loudly declare “reset used” and signaling
     toward the offensive team’s hoops.
  F. There are two types of illegal resets:
        i. It is illegal to reset the Quadball more than once on a single drive.
        ii. It is illegal to move backwards over your own keeper zone line.
  G. If an illegal reset is called, play must be stopped.
        i. If the opposing team would clearly recover the Quadball without the turnover call, the
            referee may allow play to continue under a “no harm no foul” call.

⚑ Quadball Turnover—Illegal reset

7.5. BOUNDARIES

7.5.1. Out-of-Bounds.

  A. The area within the boundary lines is inbounds.
  B. The boundary lines, and any area beyond them, are out-of-bounds.
  C. If a player becomes out-of-bounds, any ball they possess will be turned over to the opposing team
     (see: 7.5.5 Determining the Inbounding Player and 9.1.4 Turnovers)

7.5.2. Boundaries and Balls
  A. A possessed ball becomes out-of-bounds only when the player possessing it becomes
     out-of-bounds.
  B. An unpossessed ball becomes out-of-bounds when one of the following occur:
        i. The ball touches anything that is out-of-bounds, including the boundary line.
        ii. The Quadball is in contact with a player who is out-of-bounds.
  C. A live dodgeball becomes dead immediately upon becoming out-of-bounds.
  D. Play is not stopped for a dodgeball going out-of-bounds.
  E. When a live Quadball goes out-of-bounds, the referee shall declare “boundary” and
      indicate the inbounding player.
        i. If a player on the non-inbounding team possesses the Quadball, they must drop it.
        ii. All chasers on the non-inbounding team must return or remain inbounds and cease
             interfering with the inbounding player.
        iii. Play is stopped if the non-inbounding team fails to follow the above requirements, or if the
             head referee judges that retrieval of the Quadball may unnecessarily delay the game.
                                                                                                              60
  F. When a dead Quadball goes out-of-bounds after a score, it is returned to the formerly
      defending keeper, and does not need to be inbounded.
         i. Play is not stopped for a dead Quadball going out-of-bounds unless the head referee judges
             that retrieval of the Quadball may unnecessarily delay the game.
  G. It is illegal to propel a ball with the intent of sending any ball out-of-bounds.
  H. A ball that is out-of-bounds cannot be used to knock out an opponent or score a goal until it has
     been properly inbounded.

⚑ Blue Card—Propelling a ball with the intent of sending any ball out-of-bounds
⚑ Yellow Card—Intentionally or blatantly ignoring a “boundary” call

7.5.3. Players Out-of-Bounds

  A. Players are considered out-of-bounds upon touching a boundary line or the ground out-of-bounds.
        i. A player remains out-of-bounds until the player re-establishes themselves inbounds by
             touching the ground only inbounds.
        ii. If a ball possessed by a player touches the ground out-of-bounds, that player is also
             out-of-bounds.
  B. Players may not go out-of-bounds unless specifically allowed or required by rule.
        i. A player who accidentally steps out-of-bounds for a short time shall not be penalized.
              a. This does not negate any out-of-bounds turnovers.
        ii. A player who legally goes out-of-bounds must directly and immediately return inbounds
             once the reason for legally going out-of-bounds no longer applies.
  C. Players may attempt to force opponents out-of-bounds through otherwise legal contact.
        i. Once the opposing player is out-of-bounds, the forcing player must discontinue contact as
             soon as they can safely do so.
        ii. There is no penalty for being forced out-of-bounds by an opponent.
              a. This does not negate any out-of-bounds turnovers.
              b. The player must directly and immediately act to return inbounds unless they are deemed the
              inbounding player.
        iii. If the ball carrier is forced out by a player who is knocked out, they are not
             considered out-of-bounds.
              a. To avoid being called out, the ball carrier must act to return inbounds
                  immediately.
  D. Players may go out-of-bounds while attempting to force a ball carrier out-of-bounds.

⚑ Back to Hoops—Intentionally or egregiously illegally going or remaining out-of-bounds


7.5.4. Inbounding Procedure
A. The inbounding procedure begins (during live play):
         i. For the Quadball when the ball leaves the pitch boundary.
                                                                                                                   61
           ii. For dodgeballs when the inbounding beater leaves the pitch boundary (see: 7.5.5
                Determining the Inbounding Player).
  B. The inbounding player takes possession of the out-of-bounds ball and moves to the
        inbounding point.
           i. The inbounding point for the Quadball is the approximate location where the
                Quadball crossed the boundary line.
           ii. The inbounding point for a dodgeball is approximately at the closest point on the
                boundary line to the inbounding beater when they take possession of the out-of-bounds
                dodgeball.
           iii. The inbounding player is immune from being knocked out by live dodgeballs while
                out-of-bounds to inbound a ball.
  C. If play was stopped, the head referee shall restart play.
  D. An official shall count down 5 seconds.
  E. The inbounding player must inbound the ball by either carrying the ball back inbounds or throwing
        the ball inbounds before the official starts saying “zero.”
           i. If the ball is thrown, it is considered inbounds once it crosses the sideline or endline. The ball
                will still be dead until:
                 a. A dodgeball is possessed by a live player
                 b. A Quadball is propelled by a live player
           ii. If the ball is carried inbounds, it is considered inbounds once the player
                re-establishes themselves inbounds.
           iii. No player on the opposing team may physically prevent the inbounding player from fully
                re-entering the pitch at the inbounding point. Inbounding players should be given 1 foot of
                re-entry space inside the boundary line.
  F. The inbounding player may only move in a primarily perpendicular direction to the boundary
        line.
           i. This does not prevent a player from stepping into their throw.
  G. A dodgeball inbounded by a throw is dead.
  H. A Quadball inbounded by a throw is unscorable (see: 5.6.3. Unscorable Quadball).
  I. If there is an inbounding procedure violation, the player receiving the resulting turnover does not
      need to inbound the ball.

⚑ Back to Hoops and Turnover—Inbounding procedure violation

⚑ Back to Hoops—Illegally physically preventing the inbounding player from re-entering the pitch

7.5.5. Determining the Inbounding Player

   A. An inbounding player must be eligible.
          a. An eligible player is a player who meets all of the following conditions.
          b. The player is not knocked out.
          c. The player is legally allowed to possess the ball.
                                                                                                              62
          d. The player is not in possession of another ball.
          e. The player is not already the inbounding player for another currently out-of-bounds
              ball.
   B. When a ball goes out-of-bounds while in the possession of a player, the inbounding player is the
      nearest eligible player on the opposing team.
   C. Loose balls:
          a. When the Quadball goes out-of-bounds, the inbounding player is the nearest eligible player on
              the team whose chaser did not touch the ball last. This player is immune from being knocked out
              from the time they are designated as the inbounding player until they return to the pitch after the
              Quadball is inbounded.
                  i.   If there is no eligible player, the Quadball is turned over to the team whose chaser did
                       touch the ball last.
          b. When a loose dodgeball goes out-of-bounds, the inbounding player is the nearest
              eligible player to the ball at the time when the dodgeball went out-of-bounds.
                  i.   If the inbounding player becomes ineligible for any reason before gaining
                       possession of the out-of-bounds dodgeball or declines to pursue the out-of-bounds
                       dodgeball, the next nearest eligible beater shall be designated as the inbounding
                       player.
                 ii.   If there are no eligible beaters near the inbounding point and no beater on either
                       team is attempting to pursue the out-of-bounds dodgeball, the nearest official shall
                       retrieve the dodgeball and place it approximately two yards inside the inbounding
                       point.
                iii.   This ball no longer needs to be inbounded.

7.5.6. Sideline Interference
   A. Sideline interference occurs when a substitute or team staffer directly affects play in a way that
      disadvantages the opposing team.
   B. Substitutes may not interact with game balls outside of the player area during live play.

⚑ Speaking Captain Blue Card—Sideline interference

⚑ Speaking Captain Red Card—Intentional sideline interference




8. The Flag Runner
8.1. ROLE OF THE FLAG RUNNER

8.1.1. Role of the Flag Runner
                                                                                                              63

The role of the flag runner is to prevent the flag from being caught by either team’s seeker for as long as
possible while also serving as a fair and impartial official.

8.1.2. The flag Runner’s Uniform
   A. The flag runner must wear shorts or pants with the flag affixed to the middle of the back.
         i. The flag shorts and tail must meet all the requirements in section 2.3.3. The Flag.
   B. The flag runner must wear a shirt or jersey and be easily identifiable as distinct from either team.
   C. The flag runner’s shorts or pants should be all yellow or gold.

8.2. THE FLAG RUNNER’S TIMING

8.2.1. The Flag Runner’s Release

   A. The flag runner must be released onto the pitch from the scorekeeper’s table after the seeker
       floor period concludes.

8.2.2. Flag Boundaries

   A. Once the flag runner has been released onto the pitch, the flag runner may not
       intentionally leave the pitch until the period ends.
   B. Upon the release of the seekers, the flag runner is required to remain between the keeper zone
       lines.
          i. Flag runners may choose to further handicap themselves during a game, however,
              tournament staff and game officials must neither order nor request that they do so.
   C. Upon the release of the seekers, flag runners must remain within 3 steps inside the pitch boundary
      where they will not repeatedly be leaving the pitch.
          i. If a flag runner is actively engaged by a seeker within 2 arms lengths of the runner, the flag
              runner may temporarily ignore this requirement.
   D. Repeated violations of the boundaries are grounds for the replacement of the flag runner.




8.3. FLAG RUNNER REQUIREMENTS
8.3.1. Flag Runner Code of Conduct
                                                                                                             64

A flag runner must not intentionally engage in any of the below actions, unless to protect the safety
of an individual on pitch:

    A. Physically contact a seeker’s head, neck, or groin.
    B. Physically contact a seeker’s legs at or below the knee unless contact with the seeker has already
         been established in another manner.
    C. Physically interact with any individuals other than the seekers.
    D. Act in a manner deemed continuously reckless or dangerous.
    E. Show bias towards any team, including but not limited to continuously remaining more than 5
         yards from the midline on either side.
    F. Leave the pitch.
    G. Attempt to become down in any manner.
       i. Unless injured, unable to play, avoiding a dangerous situation, adjusting equipment, or asked to
              do so by a referee (see: 8.4.1. Downed Flag Runner).
    H. Touch any ball, including interfering in any way with the flag.
    I. Pull a seeker’s headband, clothing, or equipment other than the broom.
    J. Make an incorrect call or lie about a call to deceive an individual.
    K. Disobey a directive from the head referee.
    L. Throw brooms except directly down onto the ground.

8.3.2. Breach of Standards by the Flag Runner

  A. The head referee may remove any flag runner due to injury, breach of the standards listed in 8.3.1.
     Flag Runner Code of Conduct, or for being overly aggressive or irresponsible.
  B. A referee may warn the flag runner of minor violations or breaches of the standards listed in 8.3.1.
     Flag Runner Code of Conduct prior to replacement.
         i. Major violations may warrant removal of the flag runner without a previous warning.
  C. If the flag runner commits a major violation against one seeker, play should be stopped
     immediately and any flag catch by the opposing team between the violation and play being
     stopped must be called no good.

8.3.3. Runners during Stoppages

The flag runner may move around during stoppages, however:

   A. The flag runner must return to roughly where they were when play was stopped before play is
       restarted.
   B. The flag runner must not delay the restart of play.

8.4 RULED AS DOWN
                                                                                                                  65


8.4.1. Downed flag runner

   A. A flag runner is considered down when:
         i. Any part of the flag runner’s body, other than their hands or feet, touches the ground.
               a. The flag itself touching the ground does not cause the flag runner to be considered down.
         ii. Any part of the flag runner contacts the ground on or outside the boundary of the pitch.
         iii. The flag runner’s clothing needs to be adjusted, as described in 8.4.2. Adjusting the Flag
              Runner’s Clothing.
         iv. Play is restarted after any stoppage.
   B. When the flag runner is down, the flag is uncatchable, regardless of whether the flag runner
       went down intentionally or unintentionally.
         i. The flag runner is considered down until the completion of their three second head start
             (see: 8.4.3. Resetting a Downed Flag Runner).

8.4.2. Adjusting the Flag Runner’s Clothing

   A. The flag runner’s clothing needs to be adjusted if the flag runner’s shorts are notably low or off
       center, the flag runner’s other clothing obscures the flag, or the flag runner’s clothing impedes the
       flag runner.
   B. If the flag runner’s clothing needs to be adjusted, the flag runner is considered down and the flag
       is uncatchable from the moment the clothing is askew, at the discretion of the referee.
          i. If the clothing is made askew because a seeker had grabbed the flag and it did not release
              from the shorts, the flag runner shall not be considered down due to this movement of
              clothing until the seeker lets go of the flag so long as the seeker did not also grab other parts
              of the flag runner’s clothing.

8.4.3. Resetting a Downed Flag Runner

Once a flag runner has been ruled down, the seekers must:
  A. Cease directly pursuing the flag.
  B. Release all parts of the flag runner’s body, clothing, and the flag.
  C. Allow the flag runner to rise to their feet.
  D. Allow the flag runner to adjust all clothing and equipment as necessary.
  E. Allow an additional three-second head start as counted off by the lead assistant referee before
     directly pursuing the flag again.

⚑ Back to Hoops—Illegally pursuing the flag

8.5. SEEKERS AND THE FLAG RUNNER

8.5.1. Seeker Interactions with the Flag Runner
                                                                                                                  66

While seekers have the standard contact and interaction rules with regard to each other, different rules
apply to interactions with the flag runner.

Some interactions are legal for a seeker to do to a flag runner:
   A. Body blocking the flag runner, subject to standard body block rules (see: 6.3.6. Body Blocking).
   B. Pushing or moving the flag runner’s arms with one or both arms.
   C. Reaching around or over or under the flag runner with one or both arms.
         i. An arm reaching around the flag runner must only have incidental contact with them.
         ii. It is illegal to squeeze or otherwise restrict the flag runner’s body with an arm that is reaching
              around them.
Some interactions are illegal for a seeker to do to a flag runner:

⚑ Contact Foul—Illegal interaction with the runner.

⚑ Contact Foul—Egregious Contact (Red Card)




9. Penalties
9.1. DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS

9.1.1. No Harm, No Foul

In the case of a minor offense that has not given either team an advantage, a referee may decide to
verbally warn players about a potential infraction rather than calling a foul.

9.1.2. Repeat Procedure

If a player commits a foul that results in a repeat procedure penalty, the player must repeat the violated
procedure from the point of the procedure that was violated.

   A. The player does not need to return to the location of the violation unless it is necessary to complete
       the procedure correctly.
   B. The player is ineligible to otherwise interact with play until the procedure is correctly
       completed.

9.1.3. Back to Hoops

If a player commits a foul that results in a back to hoops penalty:
                                                                                                                       67

   A. Play should generally not be stopped.
   B. A referee informs the player of the infringement and tells them “back to hoops.”
   C. The player must dismount and follow the knockout procedure.
   D. If any ball is propelled by a player while or immediately after committing a foul for which they are
       sent back to hoops, that ball must be turned over to the opposing team under the turnover
       procedure.

9.1.4. Turnovers
Turnovers result in possession of a specific ball being given to the opposing team. If a player
commits a foul that results in a turnover:
  A. The referee may choose to stop play or complete the turnover while play continues unless required
        to stop play by rule.
   B. If play is not stopped to complete the turnover:
           i. The referee calls for the turnover.
           ii. If a player on the fouling team has the ball, they must drop it.
           iii. If the ball is loose, any eligible player for the receiving team may retrieve it.
           iv. The referee may pass the ball to the nearest eligible player.
           v. The fouling team may not touch the ball until the receiving team gains possession of it or
                declines the turnover.
           vi. The fouling team may not delay the receiving team from getting the ball.
           vii. The receiving team must immediately move to possess the ball or decline the turnover.
                 a. Failure to do either after being clearly informed of the turnover shall be treated as
                     declining the turnover.
  C. If play is stopped to complete the turnover:
           i. The referee gives the ball to the closest eligible player to the location of the ball.
                 a. If the ball was thrown during or after the foul, the ball is turned over to the closest eligible
                     player from the point of the throw.
   D. If there is no eligible player to receive the ball, the ball is placed at or thrown to the center hoop of
        the receiving team.
           i. If there are no eligible players to receive a dodgeball because all the receiving team’s beaters
                already have dodgeballs, the ball is dropped or left in place instead of being turned over.
   E. A Quadball to be turned over is unable to result in a goal against the receiving team until the
        procedure is complete.
   F. If both teams have committed fouls which would turn over the same ball, possession of that ball
        is determined by:
           i. The procedure for the foul receiving the most severe penalty card, if any.
           ii. If multiple fouls tie for the most severe penalty card, among the tied fouls, the procedure for
                the foul committed last.
           iii. If both teams commit fouls that tie for the most severe and one team has committed more
                fouls than the other, the procedure for the last of those fouls committed by that team shall be
                                                                                                                 68
             followed.

⚑ Back to Hoops—Delaying the completion of the turnover procedure

⚑ Yellow Card—Willfully ignoring a turnover call

9.1.5. Penalty Cards

If a foul results in a penalty card:

   A. Play is stopped.
   B. The referee signals that there was a penalty by showing the appropriate card(s) and
       communicating the nature of the foul to the players and scoretable.
   C. The player who committed the foul is sent to the penalty box.
          i. The fouling team must play down a player at the position of the fouling player for the duration
               of the penalty time.
                a. The player serving the penalty time may not be substituted while in the penalty box
                    unless they are injured or ejected.
          ii. A player who receives a red card is ejected and their substitute is sent to the penalty box.
                a. All requirements and procedures for ejected players must be followed (see: 9.1.6.
                    Ejection).
   D. Penalty cards result in the following turnovers:
          i. Any ball that the fouling player possessed or acted on from the time of the foul until play was
               stopped must be turned over to the opposing team. This includes any balls that the fouled team
               was prevented from possessing by the foul.
          ii. If a delayed penalty results in a card and the fouled team lost the Quadball between the time of
               the foul and the stoppage of play, the Quadball is turned over to the fouled team.
          iii. For yellow and red cards, if the fouling team is in possession of the Quadball or if the
               Quadball is loose, the Quadball is turned over to the opposing team.
   E. If a player receives a third yellow card in the same game, the player must receive a red card
       after being shown the yellow card.
   F. Play is resumed.



9.1.6. Ejection

If a penalty results in an ejection:

   A. The ejected player must leave the player area and may not return for the remainder of the game.
   B. If the player refuses to leave the player area:
          i. The player’s team must assist in escorting the player away from the player area.
          ii. If the player persists in refusing to leave or becomes dangerous, the head referee may end the
                                                                                                              69
          game resulting in a forfeit for the fouling player’s team.
   C. The referee may require the player to leave the vicinity of the pitch.
   D. Ejected players must not re-enter the player area or communicate with anyone inside the player
        area.
          i. This rule does not prohibit the ejected player from cheering for their team.
   E. If the ejected player was in play, the team must substitute a player in for the fouling player.
          i. The substitute is off broom.
   F. If the ejected player had any penalty time assessed which had not been fully served, their substitute
        must serve the remainder of the penalty time.
          i. If the ejected player was not in play, then the speaking captain must designate a player
              on the pitch to go to the penalty box and serve that time.
          ii. If the player was serving time for their own penalty and was ejected with a red card, the
              remaining time for the previous penalty is waived, and only the two minutes for the red
              card are served.

⚑ Speaking Captain Blue Card—Illegally communicating with people in the player area as an ejected
player

⚑ Forfeit—Persistently refusing to leave the player area after being ejected

⚑ Forfeit—Endangering others after being ejected

9.1.7. Forfeit

If a foul results in a forfeit penalty, the fouling team forfeits the game (see: 3.5.1. Declaring a
Forfeit).

   A. If both teams receive forfeit penalties on the same play or incident, a double forfeit shall be
       declared.

9.2. GENERAL FOUL PROCEDURES

9.2.1. Violations Caused by Opponents’ Fouls

   A. Any player who violates a rule as a direct result of the illegal actions of an opponent may avoid a
       penalty if they correct the violation as soon as possible.

9.2.2. Plays after a Foul

Any goal, knockout, or flag catch performed by a player while or immediately after committing a foul
does not count.

   A. If either advantage or a delayed penalty are called, the fouling player may knock out opponents
                                                                                                                  70
       during the delay as normal so long as the attempts were not made while or immediately after
       committing the foul.

9.2.3. Bench Fouls

In certain limited cases, when substitutes or team staff commit fouls, the penalty may be assessed to
the speaking captain.

   A. If a single identifiable substitute or team staffer commits a foul, only the fouling individual shall be
       assessed the penalty.
   B. If a single substitute or team staffer commits a foul but the individual cannot be identified, the
       penalty shall be assessed to the speaking captain instead.
   C. If multiple substitutes or team staff jointly commit the same or directly related offenses, only the
       speaking captain shall receive a penalty card, if applicable, for the foul committed.
          i. The speaking captain shall only receive a single penalty card for the offense.
          ii. If the penalty for the offense is a straight red card or ejection, all substitutes and team staff
               who are identified as having committed the red card or ejection offense themselves shall be
               ejected from the game.
   D. If multiple unconnected offenses are committed by substitutes or team staff, they shall be treated as
       separate incidents for the purposes of applying this rule.
          i. If this would result in multiple penalty cards being given to the speaking captain, including
              multiple red cards, on a single stoppage, then the speaking captain or their replacement shall
              serve only the single most severe of the cards. A separate player must be pulled off of the
              pitch to serve the time for each of the remaining cards.
                a. The players pulled off the pitch do not get credited with the cards.
                b. If the speaking captain is given three yellow cards in this manner, they shall be shown
                    a red card.
                     1. If these are their first three yellow cards of the game, the penalty time for the red
                        card shall be served by their replacement and the three yellow cards shall not be
                        separately served.

9.3. TIMING OF THE FOUL
9.3.1. Simultaneous Penalty

If a player commits multiple fouls, the player shall be assessed the appropriate penalty for each offense
except as follows:

   A. If a player commits multiple penalty card offenses simultaneously, the referee only adjudicates the
       penalty for the most egregious of those fouls.
   B. If a player commits multiple directly related penalty card offenses in quick succession, the referee
       only adjudicates the penalty for the most egregious of those fouls.
                                                                                                              71

9.3.2. Fouls before a Goal

       A. If the fouled team scores a good goal between the time of the foul and the adjudication of the
                 penalty for that foul, the penalty shall not result in a turnover of the Quadball.

9.3.3. Fouls after a Goal.

   A. If a player on the formerly defending team receives a penalty for a foul committed while the
       Quadball is dead:
          i. If the foul was committed as part of a play to defend against the goal, the penalty shall
               not result in a turnover of the Quadball.
          ii. If the foul was not committed as part of a play to defend against the goal, the penalty is
               assessed in full including any prescribed turnovers.
          iii.The goal does not negate any penalty time for the foul.




9.3.4. Fouls Prior to the Game

If a player receives a penalty card before the game begins:

   A. The offending team begins the game with the offending player (or the player’s replacement in the
       case of a red card) in the penalty box and one less player in the keeper zone.
   B. The player’s penalty time officially begins at brooms up.

9.3.5. Fouls after the End of the Game

   A. If a player is assessed a foul after the game ends, the penalty must be noted nominally on the
       scorecard for the game.

9.4. THE PENALTY BOX

9.4.1. Penalty Times

   A. Blue cards and yellow cards result in one minute of game time in the penalty box for the penalized player,
   unless the opposing team scores during that minute.
         i. When the opposing team scores by any method, the player with the least amount of penalty
             time remaining from a blue or yellow card is released from the penalty box.
              a. A single score may only count toward the release of one player.
                  1. If two players on the same team have the same amount of time remaining in the
                     penalty box for releasable penalties, the head referee shall use their discretion to
                                                                                                                    72
                        designate which one is released first.
                    2. If a player is serving time for multiple penalty cards simultaneously, scores will only
                        count toward their release if no other player on their team has less time remaining for
                        a blue card or yellow card penalty.
               b. An own goal counts as a score by the team for which the goal is counted.
         ii. If the fouled team scores between the time of the foul and when play is stopped, and no other
              players would be released by the score, the penalized player does not go to the penalty box
              and restarts play dismounted at their current location instead.
               a. If there are multiple blue or yellow cards, only the penalty time of the player who would
                   have been released on a score first is negated.
               b. If the penalized player receives multiple penalty cards for fouls occurring prior to play
                   being stopped and the score would count against their time, the penalized player still goes
                   to the penalty box, and their opponent’s score counts as the first score toward their release.
   B. A red card results in two full minutes of game time in the penalty box for the offending player’s
       replacement.
         i. Scores cannot release this player.
   C. Stacking penalty time:
         i. Whenever a person receives a red card for any reason, they are ejected, all other penalty time
             for fouls by that individual is negated, and only the penalty time for the red card is served.
         ii. If a person receives multiple penalty cards on a single stoppage without receiving a red card,
             the penalty time shall be one minute per card received, or until the opposing team scores a
             number of times equal to the number of cards received, whichever occurs first.
         iii. If a person who is serving time in the penalty box for their own penalty receives another
             penalty card without receiving a red card, they shall have a minute added to their penalty time
             and an additional score shall be required to release them per card.
         iv. If a player receives a penalty card while serving time for a teammate’s penalty:
               a. Another substitute must serve the remainder of the original penalty.
               b. The offending player’s penalty shall then be treated as a foul by a substitute (see: 9.2.3.
                   Bench Fouls).

9.4.2. Proceeding to the Penalty Box

Play is stopped while the penalized player, team staffer, or appropriate substitute is sent to the penalty
box.

   A. Any substitution or position change made by the fouling player after the foul and before receiving
       the penalty card must be undone, and the fouling player must serve their penalty time at the
       position at which they committed the initial foul.
          i. If the foul is illegal substitution, the entering player receives the penalty card and time.
   B. If the keeper in play is sent to the penalty box, they must switch positions with a chaser on their
       team who is in play before they go to the penalty box.
          i. The keeper must not switch with a player who is serving time in the penalty box.
                                                                                                                73
         ii. If all of the team’s chasers are already serving time in the penalty box, the keeper must switch
              headbands with a seeker or beater on their team instead.
  C. The person going to the penalty box must proceed immediately to the penalty box without delay
      and remain there until the penalty expires.
         i. If a player is given a blue or yellow card but is deemed to be too injured to serve their penalty
             by the head referee or the fouling player themselves, the speaking captain must choose an
             eligible substitute to serve the penalty.
               a. If a carded player is replaced in the penalty box due to an injury, that player may not
                   re-enter play until their substitute is released from the penalty box.
  D. Penalty time begins as soon as the head referee resumes play.
  E. If the player’s penalty time is negated by a score before they are shown the penalty card, the player
      shall not be moved to the penalty box and shall restart play dismounted at their current location.

⚑ Yellow Card—Failing to immediately proceed to the penalty box after being carded

9.4.3. Penalty Box Considerations
  A. Players serving penalty time are considered in play for the purposes of fielding a legal set
      of players.
  B. If a player is serving time for another player’s card, the carded player, not the player serving the
      time, is considered in play for the purposes of fielding a legal set of players for the duration of the
      penalty.
        i. This does not apply to cases where a player is serving time for a team staffer’s
            penalty.
  C. Players in the penalty box are subject to the same restrictions and penalties regarding
      interacting with play as substitutes.
  D. Players serving time in the penalty box may not be mounted on a broom.
  E. If a player illegally substitutes while serving time in the penalty box, the substitution must be
       undone, and a penalty for an illegal substitution in the penalty box must be assessed in lieu of
       the penalty for a regular illegal substitution.

⚑ Speaking Captain Yellow Card—Illegal substitution in the penalty box

9.4.4. Tracking Penalty Time
  A. Penalty time begins when the referee blows the whistle to restart play.
  B. As soon as a player’s penalty time expires, the timekeeper must release the player from the
  penalty box.
        i. When a player is released from the penalty box they are dismounted and must follow the
            knockout procedure to re-enter play.
        ii. Any player serving time in the penalty box may return to the pitch as soon as their penalty
            time expires.
                                                                                                                   74

9.4.5. Penalties to Substitutes and Team Staff

If a substitute or team staff receives a penalty card, that team must play a player down. The following
procedure applies:

   A. The speaking captain must designate a player in play who is not already serving penalty time.
          i. If more than one substitute or team staffer is sent to the penalty box, a separate player in play
              must be designated for each.
   B. If a substitute receives a blue or yellow card, they substitute into the game for the
       designated player.
          i. The fouling substitute proceeds to the penalty box.
          ii. The designated player returns to the bench and is eligible to substitute back into the game
              through the normal substitution procedure.
   C. If a substitute receives a red card, they are ejected and the designated player must proceed to the
       penalty box to serve the two minutes of penalty time.
   D. If a team staffer receives a penalty card, the designated player proceeds to the penalty box and
       serves the penalty time.
          i. If the team staffer was not ejected, they must join the designated player in the penalty box.
                a. Once the team staffer’s penalty time expires, the player is released and the team staffer
                   shall return to the team bench.

9.4.6. All Players in the Penalty Box
If all players in play for a team are simultaneously serving time in the penalty box, that team must forfeit the
game.

   A. If both teams reach this situation on the same play or incident, a double forfeit shall be declared.

⚑ Forfeit—Having all players in play serving penalty time

9.5. ADVANTAGE

9.5.1. Calling Advantage

If the head referee determines that stopping play due to a foul would provide an advantage in the Quadball
game to the fouling team, the referee may delay stopping play by calling advantage.

   A. If advantage is called the following procedure applies:
         i. The referee throws a marker indicating the location of the Quadball at the time of the foul and raises
             one hand straight into the air.
         ii. The referee may send the fouling player back to hoops at the start of the advantage if the situation
             warrants.
                                                                                                                   75
         iii. Play continues until the fouling team would no longer benefit from play being stopped
              including but not limited to the following situations:
               a. The fouling team gains possession of the Quadball.
             b. A goal is scored for the fouled team.
             c. The fouled team is not actively moving to score.
             d. The fouled team commits a separate foul.
             e. There is a flag catch by either team.
   B. When advantage abates, the referee must stop play, and any penalties shall be adjudicated as normal.
         i. If no penalty is assessed against the team that was on defense during the advantage call, play shall
              be restarted as though advantage was not called.

9.5.2. Advantage Restart Procedure

Play is restarted as follows after an advantage call:

   A. If a goal is scored for the non-fouling team, play restarts according to standard procedure for a goal (see:
       4.2. Restarting after a Goal).
   B. If the originally fouled team did not score before the advantage abated:
           i. The Quadball carrier at the time of the foul (or their substitute) is returned to the point of the
               Quadball at the time of the foul and is given the Quadball before play is resumed.
             a. If this player has been knocked out, they are returned to the point of the foul as an eligible
                 player.
               b. If this player committed a back to hoops foul during the advantage or has been sent to the
                   penalty box, the eligible chaser from that team nearest to the point of the foul shall move there
                   and receive the Quadball instead.
               c. If the Quadball is turned over to the originally fouling team, no players shall be moved to the
                   point of the foul.
          ii. All other players remain where they were at the time of the stoppage and, if knocked out
               before the stoppage, continue to be knocked out.
          iii. Play is resumed by the head referee.

9.6. DELAYED PENALTIES

9.6.1. Delayed Penalties

All blue, yellow, and red card penalties called by officials other than the head referee are considered
delayed penalties.

   A. If the head referee also sees and calls the foul themselves, then it is not treated as a delayed
       penalty.
                                                                                                                    76
  B. If play is stopped under this procedure and no cards are assessed as a result, it shall be treated as
      though it was not a delayed penalty.

9.6.2. Calling a Delayed Penalty

  A. If an official other than the head referee sees a player or team staffer commit a foul, that official raises
      their hand and play continues as a delayed penalty.
  B. The official may send the fouling player back to hoops during the delay if the situation warrants.
  C. The referee visually and verbally signals to the head referee that a foul has occurred and which team
      committed the foul.
        i. If the head referee determines that it is appropriate to immediately stop play, the head referee
            may do so.
        ii. The head referee may allow play to continue as in an advantage situation until the advantage
             abates in any way, unless the foul continues or escalates.
              a. If the head referee continues play as in an advantage situation, they shall raise their own arm as
                  well.
  D. After all penalties are adjudicated, play is restarted.
                                                                                                                    77

10. Game Officials
10.1. THE OFFICIALS

10.1.1. The Head Referee

   A. Tournament officials must appoint a head referee for each game.
   B. The head referee has the authority to enforce the rules and take disciplinary action from the moment
       they enter the player area until they leave the player area after the final whistle.
   C. The head referee may stop play at any time in order to enforce rules or otherwise facilitate safe and fair
       gameplay.
   D. The head referee is the only official who may directly issue penalty cards.
          i. Other officials may advise the head referee to issue penalty cards.
   E. The head referee may replace any official with an appropriate replacement if the official is injured or, in
       the opinion of the head referee, needs to be dismissed.
   F. The head referee may be replaced at the discretion of the tournament director if, and only if, the head
       referee has demonstrated gross violation of their responsibilities or is too injured to continue officiating.
         i. The replacement referee must review the scorecard prior to resuming the game.
   G. All other officials must defer to the authority of the head referee.

10.1.2. Appointing Additional Officials

The head referee or tournament officials must appoint a lead assistant referee, at least one assistant referee, a
scorekeeper, and a flag runner. They may also appoint other officials (up to two additional assistant referees, a
timekeeper, and two goal judges) for each game.

10.1.3. Officiating with a Minimum Crew

It is highly recommended that two goal judges and a timekeeper are appointed for each game.

   A. If a separate timekeeper is not appointed, the scorekeeper assumes the responsibilities of the
       timekeeper.
   B. If goal judges are not appointed, the head referee assumes the responsibilities of the goal judges.

10.1.4. Lead Assistant and Assistant Referees

   A. The primary focuses of the assistant referees, subject to the discretion of the head referee, are:
         i. Calling whether players are subject to the knockout effect.
         ii. Watching plays away from the Quadball.
         iii. Watching for balls and players going out of bounds.
                                                                                                                   78

  B. The Lead assistant referee will act as an assistant referee but may be given additional responsibilities by
      the head referee. Generally, the lead assistant referee should move to cover the most intense dodgeball
      play.

10.1.5. Seeker Referee

  A. May be assigned responsibilities at the discretion of the head referee, but after the flag is released, the
      primary focuses of the seeker referee, subject to the discretion of the head referee, are:
        i. Watching plays around the flag runner including knockouts and potential catches.
        ii. Ruling whether the flag runner is down and counting the three second head start.
        iii. Making sure the flag stays within the flag boundaries and follows the flag code of conduct.
  B. The seeker referee must not provide any additional advice or warnings to the flag runner during the game
      to help them avoid being caught, including but not limited to the locations, substitutions, and tactics of
      the seekers.
  C. The seeker referee may stop play only if they believe that a flag catch may have been successful.

10.1.6. Goal Judges

  A. The primary focuses of the goal judges, subject to the discretion of the head referee, are:
        i. Watching shots taken toward the goals.
        ii. Ruling whether the Quadball is out of bounds on their endline.

10.1.7. Scorekeeper

  A. The primary focuses of the scorekeeper are:
        i. Keeping track of the game’s score.
        ii. Updating the game’s scoreboard.
        iii. Recording the player number and reason for all penalty cards.
        iv. Announcing the score at regular intervals and upon request.
        v. Counting down the time to 20 minutes of game time.

10.1.8. Timekeeper

  A. The primary focuses of the timekeeper are:
        i. Keeping track of game time.
        ii. Keeping track of penalty time and releasing players from the penalty box after their penalty time
             is served.
        iii. Acknowledging the seekers and flag runner when they report to the scorekeeper’s table and
             releasing them onto the pitch at the appropriate time.
        iv. Watching for seeker false starts.
                                                                                                                   79
   B. The game clock does not need to be displayed in a way that is visible to the players on the pitch.
       However, if the game clock is displayed it must:
        i. Be directly and solely controlled by the timekeeper.
              a. If there are multiple displays on the field, the displays must be controlled by a single set of
                  controls such that the displays cannot fail to match.
         ii. Be clearly and fairly visible to both teams.
         iii. Be the official clock.
              a. No displayed game clock may ever be unofficial.
              b. If a displayed game clock malfunctions or otherwise ceases to be the official clock, it must be
                 turned off unless and until it is corrected and becomes the official clock again.

10.1.9. The Flag Runner

   A. The flag runner is an official and may advise the other officials on any call.
   B. The flag runner may only make direct calls on the following:
        i. Knockouts, including dismounts, around the flag runner.
         ii. Illegal contact committed against the flag runner.
         iii. Down calls when their clothing is askew and needs to be adjusted.
   C. If the flag runner and another official disagree on a direct call, the flag runner must defer to the other
       official while play is live.

10.2. OFFICIALS’ CALLS

10.2.1. Referee’s discretion

In cases where intent or severity are relevant to a call, the referee retains full discretion in judging that
severity or intent.

10.2.2. Basis of Calls
Calls made by any official must be made only based on their observations and those of the other officials
appointed for the game.

10.2.3. Adjusting Calls during a Stoppage

The head referee may freely change calls made during a stoppage before resuming play.

   A. Once the head referee blows the three whistles indicating the end of the game, goal and flag catch calls
       for that period become final and must not be adjusted.
                                                                                                                80

10.2.4. Adjusting a Goal Call

The head referee may adjust a goal or no-goal call at any time prior to the formerly defending team having
possession of the Quadball outside of the keeper zone and a subsequent significant interaction or play by the
player with possession of the Quadball.




10.3. PLAYERS AND OFFICIALS

10.3.1. Interactions with Officials

   A. Players and team staff must abide by the decisions and directives of the head referee and all other
       officials.
   B. Players and team staff must not show disrespect to any official including persistently questioning
       the decisions of the officials.

⚑ Yellow Card—Disrespecting an official

⚑ Yellow Card—Disregarding an official’s directive

10.3.2. Using Referee Commands

Players and team staff may not use verbal or visual referee signals or commands.

⚑ Blue Card—Illegally using verbal or visual referee signals or commands
                                                                                                               81


Appendix A: Definitions
Bat—To propel a ball by hitting it with another ball that is still in one’s possession at the time
of the hit.

Beaters—Two players on each team who must wear black headbands and throw, kick, or in any way propel the
dodgeballs by “knocking out” other players.

Dodgeball—One of three 8.5 inch diameter inflated rubber balls which may only be used by the beaters and are
used to temporarily knock opponents out (see: 2.3.2. Dodgeballs).

Brooms down—A call made by the referee at the start of the game. After brooms down, players may no longer
change position headbands or location behind the keeper zone line.

Brooms up—A call made by the referee at the beginning of a period. At the first “B” sound of brooms up, play
begins.

Chasers—Three players on each team who must wear white headbands and throw, kick, or in any way pass the
Quadball through the opposing team’s hoops to score 10 points and attempt to stop the other team from doing so.

Dead dodgeball—A dodgeball which cannot inflict the knockout effect due to not being live (see: 5.2.2. Live
Dodgeball).

Dead Quadball—A Quadball which must be made live before it can be played normally or used to score. (see:
4.2.1. Dead Quadball).

Flag period—The period of play after the seeker floor where seekers and the flag are added into regular game
play.

Flag Runner—A game official who is tasked with protecting the flag from being caught (see: 10.1.9. The
Flag Runner).

Flag tail—The fabric sleeve which contains a ball and must be attached to the back of the flag runner’s
shorts. It is worth 35 points and may end the game (see: 2.3.3. The Flag).

Free dodgeball—A dodgeball that is not in the possession of a beater on either team.

Game time—The official time of any given game, measured from the start of brooms up until the end of the
final period of the game but paused for stoppages in play and between periods.

Good goal—Ten points are scored for a team when the Quadball in any way passes entirely through their
opponent’s hoops and the goal is confirmed as good (See: 4.1.1. Good Goal).

Helpless receiver—A receiver who is in the process of catching a ball that is in the air. A player does not have
                                                                                                                        82
to leave the ground in order to be considered a helpless receiver. A receiver remains helpless until they establish
their footing on the ground and have time to brace for contact. It is illegal to push, charge, tackle, or wrap a
helpless receiver (see: 6.3.5. Helpless Receiver).

Hoop—A hoop-loop and the pole it is attached to (see: 2.2.2. Hoop Shape). The hoop base is not considered part
of the hoop. Players must touch one of their non-dislodged hoops before remounting to complete the knockout
procedure.

Hoop loop—The 33” inner diameter circle through which the Quadball must pass to score a goal (see: 2.2.2.
Hoop Shape).

Incidental Contact - Contact that occurs for a short duration and does not affect the overall state of the
game. Incidental contact should not transfer enough force between players to move a player from their
current position.

Intentional—An action performed with a specific purpose in mind.

Keeper—The chaser on each team who must wear a green headband and has special additional rules related to
preventing opponents from scoring with the Quadball.

Kick—To strike with a foot or feet, or with any part of the leg below the knee. At the time of a kick, the player
striking the ball is considered to have control of that ball, if they are the only player in contact with it. It is illegal
to kick an opponent.

Knockout immunity—A player with knockout immunity is not knocked out by live dodgeballs. This can
include an immune keeper or beater (see: 5.5.2 Claiming Knockout Immunity and 7.2.2 Keeper-Specific Powers).

Live dodgeball—A dodgeball that has been thrown, kicked, or otherwise intentionally propelled by a beater
who is in play, unless they are inbounding the ball, knocked out, or struck. A live dodgeball can inflict the
knockout effect upon opponents (see: 5.2.2. Live Dodgeball).

Live Quadball—A Quadball that is neither dead nor unscorable and may be used to score (see: 4.2.1. Dead
Quadball and 5.6.3. Unscorable Quadball).

Natural motion—A player’s continued movement in making a play, a singular motion that the player had
already started, if that motion cannot be stopped (see: 5.6.1. Natural Motion).

Opponents’ keeper zone—The keeper zone containing the hoops that a team is assigned to attack.

Opponents’ half—The half of the pitch or player area containing the hoops that a team is assigned to
attack.

Opponents’ live dodgeball—A live dodgeball most recently made live by the player’s opponent.

Own keeper zone—The keeper zone containing the hoops that a team is assigned to defend.
                                                                                                                83

Own half—The half of the pitch or player area containing the hoops that a team is assigned to defend.

Penalty box—A 6x6 yard box bordering the midfield line, the pitch, and the player area boundary
(see: 2.1.5. Penalty Boxes).

Penalty time—The time a player must spend in the penalty box due to a foul. Penalty time is
measured in game time and therefore does not run during a stoppage of play.

Period—A segment of a game. There are two periods in any given game: the seeker floor and the flag
period.

Pitch boundary—The 66 x 36 yard rectangular area marked by the boundary lines into which play is
generally restricted (see: 2.1.1. Boundary Lines).

Player—Any person on a team’s roster who is eligible to be in play.

Player area—The 72 x 48 yard rectangular area which includes and surrounds the pitch. Spectators may not
enter the player area. Anything outside the player area is the spectator area (see: 2.1.9. The Player Area).

Player identifier—Verbal signal used to specify which player a ref is addressing. Usually a combination of the
player's team name or jersey color and their jersey number.

Possessing team—In the context of the third dodgeball, the possessing team is the team that possessed two
dodgeballs when the remaining free dodgeball became the third dodgeball.

Possession—Complete and sole control of the ball. A player who is intentionally kicking or swatting a ball on
the ground is considered to have possession (see: 7.1.1. Use of the Ball).

Protected keeper—A keeper within their own keeper zone, except in the situation described in 7.2.2.B.

Quadball—The ball used by chasers to score goals (see: 2.3.1. The Quadball).

Quadball carrier—The player in possession of the Quadball.

Reckless - Any action that does not take the safety of players into account.

Regulation time—The duration of a game from brooms up until the score cap is reached. Regulation
time includes both the seeker floor and flag period.

Scorekeeper’s table—The location outside the player area, approximately along the extension of the midfield
line, where the scorekeeper and timekeeper are stationed.

Scoring team—The team for which a flag catch is made or a goal is scored, regardless of which team directly
caused the score.

Seeker—The player on each team who must wear a yellow headband and who attempts to remove the
                                                                                                             84
flag from the flag runner to score 35 points.

Seeker floor—The time during a period in which the flag is ineligible to be caught. In regulation
time the seeker floor is 20 minutes. (see: 3.4.3. Seeker Floor).

Speaking captain—The designated individual on the team who is the only person who may speak for the
team when conversing with officials (see: 1.1.1. Mandatory Speaking Captain).

Spectator area—The area outside of the 72 x 48 yard player area.

Stoppage—The time within a period between a referee stopping play and when the head referee resumes play.
The time between two periods is not a stoppage.

Struck beater—A struck beater is a beater who has been hit by a live dodgeball propelled by an opponent (see:
5.4.3. Struck Beater).

Substitute—A player who is not currently in play.

Substitution area—A designated zone for each team existing outside of the pitch boundary where all of that
team’s substitutions must take place (see: 2.1.7. Substitution Areas).

Third dodgeball—The only free dodgeball when one team has possession of the other two. The dodgeball can
remain the third dodgeball when the possessing team loses a dodgeball under certain conditions (see: 5.5.1. The
Third Dodgeball)

Tripping—Any attempt to knock a player off their feet through contact below their knees. Tripping is
always illegal physical contact.

Unscorable Quadball—A Quadball that is live but cannot result in a goal (see: 5.6.3. Unscorable Quadball).

Yank—To pull with sudden, sharp force.
                                                                                                              85

Appendix B: List of Fouls by Type
B-1. INDIVIDUAL FOULS
B-1. Repeat Procedure Offenses
The following are offenses for which the offending player must repeat the action properly before continuing
with play:

        1.3.1. Substitution violation
        5.3.1. Violating the knockout procedure

B-1.2 Back to Hoops Offenses
The referee must send any player who commits a back to hoops offense back to that player’s hoops with the
player completing the entirety of the knockout procedure as described in 5.3.1. The Knockout Procedure.
The following are back to hoops offenses:

        2.5.3. Illegally failing to replace a lost headband
        3.3.3. Second false restart
        5.5.1. Third dodgeball interference (also results in double dodgeball turnover)
        5.5.2. Improper immunity claim
        5.5.2. Minor invalid immunity claim
        6.4.1. Minor illegal interpositional interaction
        7.1.2. Minor failure to avoid a propelled Quadball (also results in quadball turnover)
        7.5.3. Intentionally or egregiously illegally going or remaining out of bounds
        7.5.4. Inbounding procedure violation (also results in Quadball turnover)
        7.5.4. Illegally physically preventing the inbounding player from re-entering the pitch
        8.4.3. Illegally pursuing the flag
        9.1.4. Delaying the completion of the turnover procedure

B-1.3. Turnover Offenses
The following offenses result in a turnover of either a Quadball or a dodgeball:
        5.5.1 Third dodgeball interference—two dodgeballs are turned over (also results in back to hoops)
        5.6.2. Natural motion violation
        7.1.2. Incidental interpositional ball interference (also 7.1.4.)
        7.1.2. Minor failure to avoid a propelled Quadball (also results in back to hoops)
        7.4.1 Delay of game (also results in blue card)
        7.4.3. Illegal reset
        7.5.4. Inbounding procedure violation (also results in back to hoops)

B-1.4. Blue Card Offenses
                                                                                                                 86

The following are blue card offenses:
        1.1.1. Encroaching on the pitch (also 1.1.2.)
        1.2.2. Illegal set of players in play (issued to speaking captain)
        1.3.1. Illegal Substitution
        1.4.2. Sideline interference
        2.4.4. Exceeding the broom limit (issued to speaking captain)
        2.5.2. Entering play without wearing mandatory equipment
        2.5.2. Intentionally removing mandatory equipment while in play
        2.5.4. Entering play without a legal and recognizable jersey number
        2.5.4. Two players in the player area with the same number (issued to speaking captain)
        2.5.5. Using illegal additional equipment in play
        3.2.1. Changing position headbands or location after brooms down
        3.2.1. False start
        3.4.5. Seeker false start
        4.2.1. Intentionally and illegally interacting with a dead Quadball
        4.3.3. Illegally resetting an opponent’s hoop
        5.2.3. Illegally contacting an opponent with a held dodgeball
        5.3.1. Illegally interacting with play while knocked out
        5.3.1. Affecting play while unknowingly knocked out
        5.4.1. Illegal bat
        5.4.2. Illegal dodgeball swat
        5.5.2. Invalid immunity claim
        5.5.3. Immunity violation
        7.1.1. Illegally using a ball of one’s own position
        7.1.2. Failure to avoid a propelled Quadball
        7.1.2. Illegal dodgeball interference
        7.1.3. Illegally failing to make a reasonable effort to avoid a ball
        7.4.1. Delay of game (also results in Quadball turnover)
        7.5.2. Propelling a ball with the intent of sending any ball out of bounds
        9.1.6. Illegally communicating with people in the player area as an ejected player (Issued to speaking
        captain)
        9.4.3. Illegal substitution in the penalty box (issued to speaking captain)
        10.3.2. Illegally using verbal or visual referee signals or commands

B-1.8. Contact Fouls
The following offenses result in the application of the standard contact penalty (6.2.1. Contact Fouls) :
        6.3.1. Illegal wrap
        6.3.3. Illegal push
        6.3.4. Illegal charge
        6.3.5. Illegally pushing or wrapping a helpless receiver
        6.3.7. Illegal pick
                                                                                           87
        6.3.8. Illegal attempt to steal
        6.3.9. Illegal kick
        6.3.10. Illegal slide or dive
        6.3.11. Illegal hurdle
        6.3.12. Illegal contact through a teammate
        7.2.2. Interaction with a protected keeper
        8.5.1. Illegal interaction with the flag runner

B-1.5. Yellow Card Offenses
The following are yellow card offenses:
        1.3.4. Feigning an injury
        3.3.1. Intentionally illegally moving during a stoppage
        3.3.1. Intentionally illegally moving or taking hold of a ball during a stoppage
        4.3.3. Recklessly dislodging or moving a hoop
        5.2.1. Willfully ignoring being knocked out (also 5.2.4.)
        5.2.5. Illegal Headbeat
        5.3.1. Intentionally or repeatedly violating the knockout procedure
        5.3.2. Illegal contact while knocked out
        6.5.1. Repeated internal unsporting conduct
        6.3.0 Playing recklessly
        6.3.5. Pushing or wrapping a helpless receiver
        6.3.9. Dangerous kick
        6.3.9. Kicking an opponent
        6.3.11. Illegally hurdling or attempting to hurdle any person
        6.4.1. Illegal interposition interaction
        6.4.2. Illegally interacting with a knocked out opponent
        6.5.1. Unsporting conduct
        6.5.1. Pretending to be fouled
        7.1.1. Using a ball to intentionally interact with the flag runner
        7.1.2. Interposition ball interference (also 7.1.4.)
        7.5.2. Intentionally or blatantly ignoring a “boundary” call
        9.1.4. Willfully ignoring a turnover call
        9.4.2. Failing to immediately proceed to the penalty box after being carded
        10.3.1. Disrespecting an official
        10.3.1. Disregarding an official’s directive (also 2.5.6.)

B-1.6. Red Card Offenses
The following are red card offenses:
        1.4.2. Intentional sideline interference
        2.4.2. Knowingly initiating a new play with a broken broom
        2.5.6. Using equipment in play that was disallowed by a game official
        2.5.7. Using equipment explicitly barred by the tournament director
                                                                                                             88
        2.5.8. Illegally altering game equipment
        2.5.9. Wearing forbidden equipment
        2.5.10. Wearing forbidden jewelry that impacts play
        4.3.3. Intentionally dislodging a hoop
        4.3.3. Moving or altering a hoop to affect whether the Quadball will pass through it
        6.3.5. Charging or tackling helpless receiver
        6.3.9. Violent or egregious illegal kick
        6.3.13. Playing egregiously recklessly
        6.4.1. Violent or egregious illegal interposition interaction
        6.4.2. Violently or egregiously illegally interacting with a knocked out opponent
        6.5.1. Egregious unsporting conduct
        6.5.1. Intentionally spitting at or on an opponent, spectator, official, or event staffer
        6.5.2. Engaging in a physical altercation with an opponent, spectator, official, or event staffer
        6.5.3. Serious foul play
        7.1.2. Intentionally and illegally blocking a score (also 7.1.3.)

B-1.7. Ejection Offenses
The following offenses result in an ejection, without a red card:

        1.1.1. Ejection of a player due to request by their own speaking captain
        2.5.10. Wearing forbidden jewelry that does not impact the game
        6.3.13. Egregiously illegal contact against a teammate
        6.5.1. Egregious internal unsporting conduct
        6.5.2. Engaging in a physical altercation with a teammate



B-2. SPEAKING CAPTAIN FOULS
B-2.1. General Offenses by the Speaking Captain
Except where explicitly listed, speaking captains are subject to the same penalties as players when they
commit fouls themselves.

B-2.2. Speaking Captain Blue Card Offenses
The following fouls result in a blue card for the team’s speaking captain, regardless of which team member
caused the foul:
        1.2.2. Illegal set of players in play (also 1.2.3.)
        2.4.4. Exceeding the broom limit
        2.5.4. Having two players wearing the same number in the player area
                                                                                                                      89

        9.1.6. Illegally communicating with people in the player area as an ejected player
        9.4.3. Illegal substitution in the penalty box

B-3. FORFEIT FOULS
B-3.1. Forfeit Offenses
The following offenses by individual team members or the team as a whole result in a forfeit:

        1.2.1. Falling below seven eligible players
        9.1.6. Persistently refusing to leave the player area after being ejected
        9.1.6. Endangering others after being ejected
        9.4.6. Having all players in play serving penalty time


Becoming a Certified Referee or Flag Runner
USQ offers support and certification for referees and flag runners. A certified head referee and lead assistant
referee are paid per game and are required in order for any game to count as USQ official. Certified flag
runners are not required for official games, but certified flag runners are paid for official games they officiate.
To learn more, visit
https://members.usquadball.org/ref
                                                                                                                  90


Appendix C: Changelog 2024 to 2025
Many sections of the rulebook were re-written for clarity but with no intended rules changes. The following list
highlights the rules changes that were intended and why the changes were made.

1.2.1 Rosters

Was: A team must be able to field six eligible players while the flag is not on the field and seven eligible players
while the flag is on the field.
Now: A team must be able to field at least seven eligible players at all times.
Why: Reduce rule complication

1.4.2 Sideline Interference

Was: Sideline interference occurs when a substitute or team staffer directly affects play in a way that
disadvantages the opposing team. Substitutes may not interact with game balls outside of the player area during
live play.
Now: Removed
Why: Sideline Interference was difficult to call and often ignored by both teams and refs. Now, Sideline
Interference is assumed to be covered under unsporting conduct for those cases where cards must be given.

2.3.4 Defective Balls Mid-Play

Was: If a dodgeball becomes defective mid-play and the player who threw the ball is knocked out and no longer
eligible to receive the replacement ball, and no other beater is eligible for the ball, the ball is placed at the
throwers feet.
Now: The ball is now placed at the hoops of the thrower.
Why: Changed this corner case to align with all other “ball placement when no eligible target” rules.

3.4.4 Conceding During Intermission

Was: Undefined
Now: The head referee confers with both teams to confirm the ability to continue establishing a legal set of
players, and whether either team wishes to concede, beginning with the team with the lower score. If the teams
are tied, begin with the team that lost the coin toss.
Why: There was previously no order of operations for which team conceded first in the event that both teams
wished to concede.

5.1.1 Mounting the Broom
                                                                                                          91

Was: The player remains mounted until the player loses contact with their broom
Now: This statement has been removed, allowing for a broom to fall for a short amount of time
before being caught again by the legs or ankles while still being on broom.
Why: Removing the difficult judgement call of if the broom was in freefall or still grazing a leg as
it fell.

5.2.1 Incurring the Knockout Effect

Was: Yellow Card—Willfully ignoring being knocked out
Now: Yellow Card—Significantly impacting play while knocked out
Why: Continuing with the trend of removing intent from penalties where possible

The following rules changes are part of finishing the effort to better separate blue cards and yellow cards
by a simple statement: that blue cards are for procedural mistakes and yellow cards are for contact and
unsporting penalties.

3.3.1 Stopping Play

Was: Blue Card—Substantially illegally moving during a stoppage. Yellow Card—Repeated illegally moving or
taking hold of a ball during a stoppage.
Now: Yellow Card—Ignoring referee directive.

4.3.3 Dislodging, Moving, and Resetting Hoops

Was: Blue Card—Recklessly dislodging a hoop. Blue Card—Recklessly moving hoops in the Quadball’s path.
Yellow Card—Repeatedly dislodging a hoop
Now: Yellow Card—Recklessly dislodging a hoop

6.5.1 Repeated Internal Unsporting Conduct

Was: Blue Card
Now: Yellow Card

10.3.1 Disrespecting an Official

Was: Blue or Yellow Card—Disrespecting an official

Now: Yellow Card—Disrespecting an official
                                                                                                                      92

Credits
USQ Rulebook 2025 is brought to you by staff members in USQ’s Gameplay Department, especially
those on the rules team.

Authors:
David Banas Jr.
Christian Barnes
Tommy Brown
Ashton Butler
Adam Heald
Sarah Kneiling
David Littleton
Riley Starrs
Matt Melton
Caleb Williams

Editors:
Tommy Brown
Caleb Williams
Thomas Chang-Davidson
Christian Barnes
Matt Melton
Joshua Cohen
Christopher LeCompte
Michael Clark Polner

Thanks also to the authors of previous editions including Alex Benepe, Michael Clark-Polner, Will Hack,
Jared Kowalczyk, and Xander Manshel.

To learn more about USQ, visit www.usquadball.org

Copyright © 2025 by US Quadball. All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in
any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in
critical articles and reviews.

This book has not been written, prepared, approved, or licensed by Warner Bros, J.K. Rowling, or any of her
publishers or licensees. It does not imply or claim any rights to her characters or creations, nor are the authors,
staff members, or the publisher in any way affiliated with Warner Bros, J.K. Rowling, or any of her publishers
or licensees.

The term QUADBALL™ is a trademark of The Queue Project, LLC, a joint venture of US Quadball and
Major League Quadball.
